//To Escape a \n so it isnt literal, you prefix an E before the postgres string description E 'bal bal \n bla bla'

e=Entrepreneurship: An entrepreneur wants to start a successful café. Instead of just focusing on success factors, she uses inversion to ask, "What could cause my café to fail?" She identifies potential issues like a poor location, inconsistent quality, or a menu that doesn't appeal to the target demographic. By resolving these issues preemptively, she increases her café's chances of success.\n\nPersonal Goals: Someone trying to get in shape might focus on various diets and exercise programs. With inversion, they might ask, "What actions or routines contribute to my unhealthy lifestyle?" By identifying detrimental habits like snacking late at night or skipping breakfast, they can create a plan that's more about avoiding certain behaviors than adding new ones.\n\nCorporate Strategy: A corporation trying to enter a new market might be focused on the tactics that would ensure a successful entry. By inverting the problem, they look for factors that could lead to a failure, like cultural misunderstandings, non-compliance with local regulations, or misalignment of product offerings with local consumer preferences.


Occams Razor = 
Occam''s Razor is a principle from philosophy and problem-solving that suggests when faced with competing hypotheses that predict equally well, the one with the fewest assumptions should be selected. This mental model advocates for simplicity, encouraging individuals to cut through complexity and focus on what''s essential. It''s attributed to the 14th-century logician and Franciscan friar William of Ockham, hence its name. The idea is not about choosing the simplest answer always but about finding an explanation that, while making the fewest assumptions, adequately answers the question or solves the problem.\n\nOccam''s Razor is valuable across various domains, from science to business strategy, as it guides us to eliminate unnecessary variables and hypotheses. This mental model has influenced modern scientific methods, emphasizing empirical evidence and simple theories. It teaches that complexity should not be assumed without necessity. In essence, Occam''s Razor is about efficiency in thought—reaching conclusions that are as uncomplicated as they are accurate.


real=
Software Development: A software engineer faces a bug in a complex application. Instead of concocting elaborate theories about the source of the bug, the engineer applies Occam''s Razor by investigating the simplest explanations first—such as recent changes to the code or known issues in utilized libraries. This approach often leads to a quicker resolution than diving into less likely, complex scenarios.\n\nMedical Diagnosis: Doctors often leverage Occam''s Razor when diagnosing patients. Faced with a set of symptoms, they are trained to consider the most common and simplest diseases that could explain them, rather than rare and complex conditions. This method doesn''t rule out thorough investigation but serves as a guiding principle to efficient and effective patient care.\n\nInvestment Decisions: Investors might analyze a sudden drop in a company''s stock price. Occam''s Razor suggests looking for the most straightforward explanations—such as a poor earnings report or a shift in market sentiment—before considering more convoluted theories involving market manipulation or insider trading. This helps investors make decisions based on probable causes rather than speculative ones.


Compound Interest = 
Compound interest is a fundamental concept in finance that refers to the process where the value of an investment grows exponentially over time because the interest that accrues is added to the principal sum, thereby earning interest itself. This principle is the cornerstone of many investment strategies and savings accounts, emphasizing the power of saving early and letting time work in your favor.
\n\nThe magic of compound interest lies in its ability to accumulate wealth over time with seemingly small, initial investments. Unlike simple interest, where interest is calculated only on the principal amount, compound interest ensures that each period's interest is added to the principal, forming a new base for future interest calculations. This cycle leads to an exponential increase in the investment's value, showcasing the significance of time in the compounding process.
\n\nAlbert Einstein famously dubbed compound interest as the "eighth wonder of the world," noting that "He who understands it, earns it; he who doesn't, pays it." This statement underlines the dual nature of compound interest, serving as both a boon for investors and a burden for borrowers. In the realm of savings and investment, compound interest encourages the discipline of regular savings, highlighting that a modest amount saved today can grow into a substantial sum over decades.
\n\nFor instance, consider a retirement savings plan where an individual begins contributing a fixed annual amount at the age of 25. By the time of retirement at 65, the amount contributed, though significant, will be dwarfed by the interest earned over those 40 years, assuming a consistent interest rate and the reinvestment of interest. This exemplifies the principle of "time in the market beats timing the market," advocating for long-term investment strategies over short-term speculation.

real =
Retirement Savings: An individual starts contributing $5,000 annually to their retirement account from age 25, with an average annual return of 7%. By the age of 65, the account doesn't just reflect the sum of these contributions but is magnified by compound interest, resulting in a total significantly higher than the sum of annual contributions.
\n\nCredit Card Debt: On the flip side, compound interest can exacerbate debt. If a credit card balance of $10,000 is subject to a 20% annual interest rate and the minimum payment covers only the interest, the principal amount remains unchanged. The interest compounds on the original debt, leading to a situation where the debtor pays multiple times the original amount without reducing the principal.
\n\nEducation Savings Plans: Parents saving for their child's education may start a college savings fund when the child is born. Even with modest monthly contributions, the power of compound interest over 18 years can turn these contributions into a significant sum, offsetting the high costs of tertiary education.

Pareto Principle =
The Pareto Principle, commonly known as the 80/20 Rule, posits that roughly 80% of effects come from 20% of causes. Named after Italian economist Vilfredo Pareto, who in 1896 noticed that 80% of Italy’s land was owned by 20% of the population, this principle has found relevance in a wide array of fields from economics to business management, and personal productivity. The Pareto Principle suggests that in many scenarios, a small number of factors often lead to a disproportionately large effect or outcome.
\n\nThis principle serves as a mental model for identifying and focusing on the most efficient causes that drive the majority of results. It encourages prioritization and efficient allocation of resources by highlighting the importance of focusing efforts on the "vital few" rather than the "trivial many."

real=
Business Sales: In many businesses, a common observation is that 80% of sales come from 20% of customers. By identifying these key customers and understanding their needs and preferences, businesses can tailor their services or products to enhance satisfaction and loyalty, thereby maximizing revenue from these crucial relationships.
\n\nProductivity: Individuals may find that 80% of their most significant achievements are the result of 20% of their tasks. Recognizing these high-impact activities can lead to a more focused and effective approach to work and personal projects, prioritizing tasks that offer the greatest returns on time and effort invested.
\n\nSoftware Development: It's often observed that 80% of software bugs can be traced back to 20% of the code. By focusing on these critical sections, developers can significantly improve the stability and performance of their applications with a comparatively minimal investment of resources.

Compound Interest:=
Supply and demand is a fundamental concept in economics that describes how the availability of goods (supply) and the desire for them (demand) determine their price. At its core, this mental model illustrates how market equilibrium is achieved, where the quantity of a good supplied equals the quantity demanded, stabilizing its price.
\n\nThe law of demand states that, all else being equal, as the price of a product increases, the demand for it decreases, and vice versa. Conversely, the law of supply suggests that as the price of an item goes up, so does the quantity supplied, assuming other factors remain constant. The intersection of the supply and demand curves in a graph represents the market equilibrium, dictating the price at which the product will be sold and the quantity that will be produced and purchased.
\n\nThis mental model is pivotal in understanding market dynamics and economic principles. It explains how shortages and surpluses occur, impacts of government intervention in the market, and the importance of pricing strategies for businesses. Supply and demand also shed light on consumer behavior, showing how preferences, income levels, and substitute goods affect market outcomes.

real=
Housing Market: In cities where there is a high demand for living space due to job opportunities, entertainment, and amenities (high demand) but a limited number of homes (low supply), housing prices tend to skyrocket. This situation creates a seller's market, where there are more buyers than available homes, pushing prices up.
\n\nTechnological Gadgets: When a new technology gadget, like the latest smartphone model, is released, initial demand often exceeds supply, leading to high prices. As production increases (supply) and the initial excitement wanes (demand decreases), prices tend to stabilize or decrease to match the equilibrium point.
\n\nGasoline Prices: Supply disruptions due to geopolitical tensions or natural disasters can lead to a sudden decrease in oil supply, causing gasoline prices to surge. Conversely, when oil production increases or demand drops due to alternative energy sources, gasoline prices tend to fall.

Supply and Demand:=
Supply and demand is a fundamental concept in economics that describes how the availability of goods (supply) and the desire for them (demand) determine their price. At its core, this mental model illustrates how market equilibrium is achieved, where the quantity of a good supplied equals the quantity demanded, stabilizing its price.
\n\nThe law of demand states that, all else being equal, as the price of a product increases, the demand for it decreases, and vice versa. Conversely, the law of supply suggests that as the price of an item goes up, so does the quantity supplied, assuming other factors remain constant. The intersection of the supply and demand curves in a graph represents the market equilibrium, dictating the price at which the product will be sold and the quantity that will be produced and purchased.
\n\nThis mental model is pivotal in understanding market dynamics and economic principles. It explains how shortages and surpluses occur, impacts of government intervention in the market, and the importance of pricing strategies for businesses. Supply and demand also shed light on consumer behavior, showing how preferences, income levels, and substitute goods affect market outcomes.

real=
Housing Market: In cities where there is a high demand for living space due to job opportunities, entertainment, and amenities (high demand) but a limited number of homes (low supply), housing prices tend to skyrocket. This situation creates a seller's market, where there are more buyers than available homes, pushing prices up.
\n\nTechnological Gadgets: When a new technology gadget, like the latest smartphone model, is released, initial demand often exceeds supply, leading to high prices. As production increases (supply) and the initial excitement wanes (demand decreases), prices tend to stabilize or decrease to match the equilibrium point.
\n\nGasoline Prices: Supply disruptions due to geopolitical tensions or natural disasters can lead to a sudden decrease in oil supply, causing gasoline prices to surge. Conversely, when oil production increases or demand drops due to alternative energy sources, gasoline prices tend to fall.

Opportunity Cost: =
Opportunity cost is a key concept in economics and decision-making that represents the benefits an individual, investor, or business misses out on when choosing one alternative over another. Essentially, it's the value of the next best option that you forego when making a choice. This mental model helps in understanding the trade-offs involved in every decision, emphasizing that every choice has a cost, even if it's not immediately apparent.
\n\nUnderstanding opportunity costs encourages more mindful decision-making, urging individuals and businesses to weigh the potential benefits of various actions against what must be given up. This concept is crucial for resource allocation, budgeting, and strategic planning, ensuring that resources are directed toward the most beneficial outcomes.

real=
Career Decisions: When choosing between two job offers, the opportunity cost of selecting one over the other includes not just the difference in salary, but also the benefits, work-life balance, career growth opportunities, and personal satisfaction that you might forgo by not choosing the alternative.
\n\nInvestment Choices: An investor deciding between investing in stocks or bonds must consider the opportunity cost, which is the potential returns one could miss from not choosing the alternative investment. If stocks outperform bonds over a certain period, the opportunity cost of choosing bonds is the foregone gains from not investing in stocks.
\n\nTime Management: Choosing to spend an evening watching TV instead of studying for an upcoming exam has an opportunity cost related to the knowledge and preparation you could have gained. This concept highlights the importance of considering what you're giving up when allocating your time to various activities.

Sunk Cost Fallacy: =
The sunk cost fallacy is a cognitive bias that compels individuals and organizations to continue an endeavor or follow through on an investment based on the cumulative prior investment (time, money, resources) rather than the prospective future benefits. The fallacy lies in the reasoning that further investment is justified to not "waste" the resources already spent, despite no evidence suggesting continued investment will yield a favorable outcome. This mental model is crucial for understanding human decision-making processes and for developing strategies to avoid common pitfalls in business and personal finance.
\n\nRecognizing and overcoming the sunk cost fallacy can lead to more rational decision-making, where choices are based on future value rather than past expenditures. It encourages cutting losses when necessary and making decisions that will add value moving forward, rather than being anchored to past decisions.

real=
Business Projects: A company may continue investing in a failing project because it has already spent a significant amount on development, even if future projections show that the project will likely fail. The rational decision would be to evaluate the project based on future returns and not past expenses.
\n\nPersonal Relationships: Individuals might stay in unsatisfactory or harmful relationships due to the time and emotional investment they have made. The sunk cost fallacy can cloud judgment, making it difficult to see that the best decision for future happiness might be to move on.
\n\nEducational Investments: Students might continue a degree or course they are no longer interested in simply because they have already invested significant time and tuition fees into it, ignoring the potential benefits of switching paths to something that aligns more with their current interests and future career prospects.

Confirmation Bias: =
Confirmation bias is a cognitive bias that influences individuals to favor, seek out, interpret, and remember information in a way that confirms their preexisting beliefs and hypotheses, while simultaneously ignoring or discounting evidence that contradicts them. This mental model plays a significant role in how people gather, interpret, and recall information, affecting decision-making and critical thinking. It's prevalent in various aspects of life, from personal beliefs and social interactions to scientific research and political opinions.
\n\nUnderstanding and acknowledging confirmation bias is essential for developing more objective, balanced viewpoints and for improving decision-making processes. By actively seeking out and considering opposing viewpoints and evidence, individuals can mitigate the effects of confirmation bias, leading to more informed and less biased conclusions.

real=
Social Media Echo Chambers: Social media algorithms often show users content that aligns with their existing views, reinforcing their beliefs and creating an echo chamber effect. This can intensify confirmation bias, as users are predominantly exposed to information that supports their viewpoints.
\n\nInvestment Decisions: Investors may selectively seek out information that supports their decision to buy or hold a stock, ignoring warning signs or negative information that suggests it might be time to sell. This can lead to poor investment choices based on biased information processing.
\n\nLegal Judgments: In the legal system, confirmation bias can affect how evidence is interpreted by both prosecutors and defense attorneys. Each side may focus on evidence that supports their case while disregarding information that undermines it, potentially affecting the fairness of trials.

Cognitive Dissonance=
Cognitive dissonance is a psychological concept that describes the mental discomfort experienced by an individual who holds two or more contradictory beliefs, ideas, or values at the same time. Introduced by psychologist Leon Festinger in the 1950s, this theory is fundamental in understanding human behavior, motivation, and attitude change. Cognitive dissonance occurs because humans have an innate drive for internal consistency and harmony among their cognitions (beliefs and attitudes). When confronted with information or decisions that conflict with existing beliefs, discomfort or dissonance is created, compelling individuals to reduce it through various means, such as changing beliefs, justifying behaviors, or ignoring new information.
\n\nThis mental model is crucial in various domains, including decision-making, behavior change, and marketing. Understanding cognitive dissonance helps explain why people sometimes act against their best interests or hold on to beliefs even in the face of contradictory evidence. It also underlines the importance of self-awareness in recognizing and addressing dissonance to make more rational decisions.

real=
Health Behaviors: A smoker who understands the health risks associated with smoking yet continues to smoke experiences cognitive dissonance. To reduce dissonance, they might justify their behavior by underestimating the health risks, emphasizing the difficulty of quitting, or highlighting the stress-relieving benefits of smoking.
\n\nInvestment Decisions: An investor may experience cognitive dissonance after purchasing a stock that performs poorly. Despite evidence suggesting they should sell the stock, the desire to avoid admitting a mistake can lead to justifying the decision by focusing on long-term potential or attributing the poor performance to temporary market conditions.
\n\nEnvironmental Attitudes: An individual who values environmental conservation but drives a gas-guzzling vehicle may experience cognitive dissonance. To alleviate this discomfort, they might rationalize their choice by citing the need for safety, the convenience of a larger vehicle, or plans to drive less and reduce their carbon footprint.


Dunning-Kruger Effect: =
The Dunning-Kruger Effect is a cognitive bias in which people with limited knowledge or competence in a particular domain greatly overestimate their own ability, while more knowledgeable people may underestimate their competencies. This phenomenon was identified by social psychologists David Dunning and Justin Kruger in 1999. Their research suggests that the lack of expertise causes individuals to fail to recognize their own inadequacies, leading to a significant overestimation of their own skills. Conversely, competent individuals might assume that tasks easy for them are equally easy for others, leading them to undervalue their own expertise.
\n\nThe Dunning-Kruger Effect has wide-reaching implications across education, the workplace, and social interactions. It explains why some individuals might approach complex tasks with unwarranted confidence, while those more qualified may hesitate to share their insights. This effect underlines the importance of feedback, self-awareness, and lifelong learning in personal and professional development.

real=
Amateur Investors: An amateur investor with minimal market knowledge might place highly risky bets based on a few success stories or superficial analysis, believing they have a knack for picking winners. This overconfidence, driven by the Dunning-Kruger Effect, can lead to significant financial losses as they overlook the complexities of market dynamics.
\n\nFirst-time Managers: A newly promoted manager might overestimate their leadership abilities, thinking managing a team is straightforward. Without recognizing the nuances of effective leadership, such as empathy, communication, and strategic thinking, they may face challenges in team dynamics and performance, highlighting the gap between perception and competence.
\n\nSocial Media Experts: Individuals may claim expertise in social media based on personal use without understanding the strategic planning, content creation, and analytics involved in professional social media management. This overestimation of their skills can result in ineffective campaigns or advice when applied in a business context.

Hanlon’s Razor: =
Hanlon's Razor is a philosophical adage that suggests a way to interpret the actions of others: "Never attribute to malice that which is adequately explained by stupidity." In simpler terms, it advises that one should not assume bad intentions behind someone's actions when they can just as easily be explained by ignorance or error. This heuristic emphasizes the importance of not jumping to the worst conclusions about others' motives, especially when simpler explanations exist.
\n\nHanlon's Razor is not just a call for giving people the benefit of the doubt; it's also a mental model for navigating interpersonal relationships, professional environments, and social interactions more smoothly. By reducing the tendency to perceive malevolence behind every mistake or inconsiderate action, individuals can maintain more positive outlooks and relationships. It encourages patience, understanding, and a focus on problem-solving rather than blame.

real = 
Workplace Miscommunications: When an email is accidentally not sent or a message is poorly phrased, leading to confusion, Hanlon's Razor would suggest considering it a simple mistake rather than an intentional act of sabotage or disrespect. This approach can prevent unnecessary conflict and foster a more forgiving and collaborative workplace culture.
\n\nSocial Media Misunderstandings: In the realm of social media, where tone and context are often lost, Hanlon’s Razor advises against assuming malicious intent behind ambiguous posts or comments. Often, these may stem from a lack of awareness about how words might be received rather than an intent to offend.
\n\nPublic Figures' Gaffes: When a public figure makes an ill-informed comment or poorly thought-out statement, applying Hanlon's Razor would mean considering it could be due to a lack of information or understanding rather than a deliberate attempt to provoke or mislead.

Second-Order Thinking: =
Second-order thinking is a mental model that encourages looking beyond the immediate consequences of decisions to consider further-reaching effects. It involves asking the question, "And then what?" after every outcome to anticipate the chain of actions and reactions that might unfold. This approach contrasts with first-order thinking, which focuses on the initial and most apparent consequences without considering the subtler, longer-term impacts.
\n\nHoward Marks, an influential investor, popularized the term, emphasizing its importance in making better investment decisions. However, the application of second-order thinking extends far beyond finance, touching every aspect of life where complex systems and interdependencies exist. It's a tool for critical thinking that helps identify potential unintended consequences, making it invaluable for strategic planning, policy-making, and personal decision-making.

real=
Environmental Policy: Implementing a new environmental regulation might immediately reduce pollution (first-order effect), but second-order thinking would also consider potential impacts on local businesses, employment, and alternative, potentially worse environmental outcomes if industries move to less regulated regions.
\n\nHealthcare Decisions: Introducing a new healthcare treatment or drug may solve a particular health issue (first-order effect), but second-order thinking requires examining potential side effects, long-term health outcomes, and how it might affect patients' behavior towards other health practices.
\n\nTechnology Adoption: The introduction of a new technology platform might initially improve efficiency and user satisfaction (first-order effect), but second-order thinking would delve into how it might change user behavior over time, the impact on competitor behavior, and potential dependencies on the technology that could introduce vulnerabilities.

Margin of Safety: =
The Margin of Safety is a fundamental principle in investing and finance, emphasizing the importance of purchasing assets at a significant discount to their intrinsic value to reduce risk. This concept was popularized by Benjamin Graham, often considered the father of value investing, and further advocated by his famous student, Warren Buffett. The margin of safety acts as a buffer against errors in calculation or unforeseen market downturns, ensuring that even if estimations of value are slightly off, the investment still has a reduced likelihood of incurring a significant loss.
\n\nIn essence, the margin of safety is about not paying full price for an asset, to protect oneself against the volatility and unpredictability of the market. It's a conservative approach that prioritizes preservation of capital over speculative gains, making it a cornerstone of risk-averse investment strategies.

real=
Stock Investing: When an investor analyzes a company and determines its shares are worth $100 based on future cash flows, earnings, and assets, they might only decide to purchase the stock if it's trading at $70 or less. This $30 difference represents the margin of safety, providing room for error in the valuation process and market fluctuations.
\n\nReal Estate: A real estate investor might apply the margin of safety principle by purchasing property at a price well below its estimated market value after renovations. This approach accounts for potential overruns in renovation costs, unexpected market downturns, or difficulties in securing tenants.
\n\nBusiness Ventures: Entrepreneurs can apply the margin of safety concept by starting businesses with lower fixed costs and higher gross margins. This financial cushion allows the business to remain viable even if sales dip or unexpected expenses arise, providing a safety net during tough economic times.



Diminishing Returns: =
The concept of diminishing returns, also known as the law of diminishing returns, is a principle in economics that describes a point at which the level of profits or benefits gained is less than the amount of money or energy invested. It occurs in situations where, after a certain level of performance or capacity has been reached, any additional attempt to improve the output or outcome will result in a decrease in the effectiveness or productivity relative to the resources being invested.
\n\nOriginating from the field of agricultural economics, this principle was initially observed by noting that continuously adding more of a single factor of production, such as fertilizer to a crop, while keeping all others constant, eventually yields lower per-unit returns. The concept has since been generalized to various sectors and activities, highlighting a universal law affecting productivity and efficiency across different domains.

real=
Educational Effort: A student may find that studying for five hours straight leads to significant learning and retention. However, beyond this point, each additional hour might contribute less to learning outcomes due to fatigue, indicating diminishing returns on study time. Balancing study with rest becomes essential to optimize learning efficiency.
\n\nMarketing Campaigns: A business might increase its advertising budget to attract more customers. Initially, the campaign attracts a significant number of new customers, but as spending continues to increase, the rate of customer acquisition begins to slow down. Here, the business encounters diminishing returns on its advertising investment, suggesting the need to explore other strategies or channels for growth.
\n\nExercise and Fitness: In the pursuit of physical fitness, an individual might observe significant improvements in strength and endurance from the initial weeks of a workout regimen. However, as the intensity and duration of workouts increase, the incremental gains in fitness level off, illustrating diminishing returns in the context of physical training. This phenomenon underlines the importance of rest and recovery, as well as varying training methods to continue progress.

Feedback Loops: =
Feedback loops are foundational mechanisms in systems theory, referring to processes where the outputs of a system are circled back and used as inputs. This dynamic can significantly influence the behavior and evolution of the system over time. Feedback loops are categorized into two main types: positive feedback loops, which amplify changes and move the system away from its starting state, leading to exponential growth or decline; and negative feedback loops, which dampen changes, helping the system to stabilize around a set point or equilibrium.
\n\nThe concept of feedback loops is prevalent across various disciplines, including biology, ecology, economics, engineering, and psychology, underscoring their universal applicability in understanding complex systems. Recognizing and analyzing feedback loops enable better predictions about system behavior and more effective interventions for desired outcomes.

real=
Climate Change: A positive feedback loop is evident in the melting of polar ice caps. As ice melts, less sunlight is reflected away from the earth's surface, increasing the absorption of heat and causing temperatures to rise further. This loop accelerates the melting process, contributing to the global warming phenomenon.
\n\nPopulation Dynamics: In ecology, negative feedback loops help regulate population sizes. For example, as a prey population increases, it supports a larger population of predators. However, as the predators consume more prey, the prey population decreases, which in turn reduces the predator population. This interaction helps stabilize both populations around an equilibrium point.
\n\nEconomic Growth: Economies can experience positive feedback loops through the process of capital accumulation. As businesses invest and grow, they can generate more profits, leading to further investment and growth. This cycle can drive rapid economic expansion but also risks leading to bubbles if not tempered by negative feedback mechanisms, such as market corrections or regulatory interventions.


Network Effects: =
Network effects, a key concept in economics and business strategy, describe a scenario where a product or service becomes more valuable as more people use it. This phenomenon is rooted in the idea that the utility and appeal of a product increase with each additional user, creating a positive feedback loop that encourages further adoption. Network effects are pivotal in the success of many digital platforms and technologies, underscoring how interconnectedness can amplify value and competitive advantage.
\n\nThere are two primary types of network effects: direct and indirect. Direct network effects refer to situations where a product's value to any single user increases as the total number of users rises, as seen with communication services like email or social media platforms. Indirect network effects occur when the value of a product increases due to the expansion of a complementary product or service, such as more apps being developed for a widely used operating system.

real=
Social Media Platforms: Platforms like Facebook and Twitter become more engaging and valuable as more users join and contribute content, leading to a richer, more diverse user experience. This increased utility encourages new users to join, further strengthening the network effect.
\n\nOnline Marketplaces: E-commerce platforms like eBay and Amazon benefit from network effects. For sellers, the value of the platform increases with the number of potential customers. Conversely, for buyers, the value increases with the variety and quantity of sellers. This dynamic creates a virtuous cycle, attracting more buyers and sellers.
\n\nPayment Systems: Payment services like PayPal or credit card networks become more useful as more merchants and consumers adopt them. Consumers find more places where they can use their preferred payment method, and merchants benefit from access to a larger customer base that prefers these payment options.

Critical Mass: =
Critical Mass refers to the minimum amount of something required to start or maintain a venture, especially in contexts where the success of an activity or an entity depends significantly on reaching a threshold level of participation, adoption, or investment. Originating from nuclear physics, where it denotes the smallest amount of fissile material needed to sustain a nuclear chain reaction, the concept has been widely applied in social sciences, marketing, and network theory to describe the tipping point at which a product, idea, or behavior becomes self-sustaining and grows exponentially.
\n\nIn the realm of business and technology, achieving critical mass is often seen as a pivotal milestone for start-ups and new products, particularly those relying on network effects. Once critical mass is reached, the value of the product or service increases dramatically due to the network effects, leading to accelerated adoption and growth.

real=
Social Networking Sites: For a new social networking site, reaching critical mass means acquiring a sufficient user base that generates enough content and interaction to attract more users. Facebook, for example, initially focused on college campuses to quickly build a dense network of users, which then helped it expand globally.
\n\nRide-Sharing Apps: Ride-sharing platforms like Uber and Lyft need a critical mass of drivers and riders in each new city they enter. A sufficient number of drivers ensures short wait times, making the service attractive to riders. Conversely, a large pool of riders ensures drivers can find enough fares to make their participation worthwhile.
\n\nCryptocurrencies: The value and stability of a cryptocurrency often depend on achieving a critical mass of users who trade it and merchants who accept it as payment. Bitcoin’s growth, for instance, has been significantly fueled by reaching critical thresholds that have led to wider acceptance and use.

Anchoring Effect: =
The Anchoring Effect is a cognitive bias that influences how people intuitively assess probabilities and make decisions based on the first piece of information they receive, known as the "anchor." This mental model was identified by psychologists Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman, who noted that once an anchor is set, subsequent judgments are made by adjusting away from that anchor, often insufficiently. The anchoring effect shows how initial exposure to a number or value can significantly impact decision-making, negotiations, pricing strategies, and judgments, even when the anchor is arbitrary or unrelated to the decision at hand.
\n\nThis bias can affect a wide range of scenarios, from financial decision-making to everyday choices. Understanding and recognizing the anchoring effect can help individuals and businesses make more informed decisions by critically evaluating how initial information might bias their final judgments.

real =
Salary Negotiations: In job negotiations, the first salary number mentioned can significantly influence the negotiation outcome. If an employer first offers a low salary (setting a low anchor), the final agreed salary may be lower than if the employee had set a higher anchor by stating their salary expectation first.
\n\nReal Estate Pricing: When selling a house, the initial listing price sets an anchor that can influence potential buyers' perceptions of value and the final sale price. A home priced too high initially may deter offers, even if the price is later lowered, because the high anchor influences buyers' perception of the property's worth.
\n\nJudicial Sentencing: Research has shown that even experienced legal professionals can be influenced by anchoring. When provided with a suggested sentence length before making their own judgment, judges' sentencing decisions can be anchored by the suggestion, impacting the fairness and objectivity of their decision-making process.


Social Proof:=
Social proof is a psychological phenomenon where people assume the actions of others in an attempt to reflect correct behavior for a given situation. This concept, identified by psychologist Robert Cialdini in his 1984 book, "Influence: The Psychology of Persuasion," highlights the human tendency to look to others to determine their own actions, especially in situations where they are uncertain about what to do. Social proof is driven by the belief that surrounding people possess more knowledge about the situation.
\n\nThe principle of social proof leverages the power of the collective to influence individual behavior. It's evident in a wide range of human activities and is a key factor in marketing strategies, online user experiences, and social behavior. Recognizing and understanding social proof can help individuals make better decisions by critically evaluating why they are following the crowd and whether the crowd's actions align with their best interests.

real=
Consumer Behavior: Product reviews and testimonials serve as social proof that can significantly influence purchasing decisions. When consumers are uncertain about buying a product, they often look at reviews to determine its quality and reliability based on others' experiences.
\n\nSocial Media Trends: The popularity of content on social media, as measured by likes, shares, and comments, acts as social proof, encouraging further engagement from users. Viral trends often gain momentum through social proof, as people join in because they see many others participating.
\n\nRestaurant Dynamics: The presence of customers in a restaurant serves as social proof of its quality. A busy restaurant with a waiting line is often perceived as better than an empty one, leading more people to dine there based on the assumption that many customers indicate good food or experience.

Scarcity Principle: =
The Scarcity Principle is a psychological and economic concept suggesting that people value and desire something more when it is rare or difficult to obtain. This principle, widely recognized in the field of behavioral economics, was notably explored by Robert Cialdini in his seminal work on influence and persuasion. Scarcity taps into the human instinct of loss aversion, where the potential of losing access to a resource makes it seem more valuable than it might be if it were abundant. This effect is not only seen in consumer behavior but also influences decision-making, social dynamics, and even personal relationships.
\n\nScarcity can create a sense of urgency, prompting individuals to act quickly to acquire something before it runs out. Marketers and businesses often leverage this principle to enhance the appeal of their products or services, employing tactics like limited-time offers, exclusive memberships, or highlighting limited stock to boost sales and engagement.

real=
Limited Edition Products: When companies release a product as a limited edition, stating that only a certain number will be made, it often leads to a rush of customers wanting to purchase the item before it sells out. The scarcity of the product makes it more desirable, driving up demand and, in some cases, allowing the company to command a higher price.
\n\nFlash Sales: Online retailers use flash sales, where discounts are offered for a short period, to create a sense of urgency among consumers. The limited time frame leverages the scarcity of time, pushing customers to make purchases more quickly than they might under normal circumstances.
\n\nWater Restrictions: In areas experiencing drought, water restrictions may be put in place, limiting the use of water for certain activities to specific days or times. The scarcity of water availability heightens people's awareness of its value, leading to more conscientious usage and efforts to conserve this scarce resource.

Status Quo Bias: =
Status quo bias is a cognitive bias that favors the current state of affairs, leading individuals to prefer things to remain the same or to choose options that maintain the status quo. This bias stems from a variety of psychological factors, including fear of loss, preference for familiarity, and the desire to avoid the effort or risk associated with change. Highlighted in the work of Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky, status quo bias can significantly impact decision-making processes, often causing people to make choices that are not in their best interest or to resist beneficial innovations and changes.
\n\nThe bias is particularly influential in areas requiring active choices, such as personal finance, health care decisions, and political elections. Understanding and recognizing status quo bias is crucial for overcoming inertia and making decisions that align more closely with one’s goals and interests.

real=
Retirement Savings: Many employees stick with default retirement savings plans or contributions rates set by their employers, even when adjusting these could lead to better financial outcomes. The effort and uncertainty involved in changing contributions or investment allocations can make the status quo seem more appealing.
\n\nHealthcare Choices: Patients often stick with a long-standing medical provider or treatment plan, even when evidence suggests an alternative might be more effective. The comfort of familiarity and fear of the unknown can make the status quo more attractive than exploring new options.
\n\nTechnology Adoption: Individuals and organizations may continue using outdated technology or systems because the perceived cost and effort of upgrading outweigh the potential benefits. This bias can hinder productivity and innovation, as the benefits of new technology are overlooked in favor of the familiar.

Reciprocity:=
Reciprocity is a social norm and psychological principle suggesting that when someone does something beneficial for us, we feel compelled to return the favor. This inherent desire to give back when we've received creates a cycle of mutual benefit and fosters cooperation among individuals. Robert Cialdini, in his exploration of influence and persuasion, identifies reciprocity as one of the key principles guiding human behavior in social interactions and exchanges. The concept is deeply rooted in human psychology and cultural practices worldwide, acting as a foundational element in building and maintaining social bonds and community cohesion.
\n\nReciprocity operates on both small and large scales, from everyday acts of kindness to complex transactions in business and diplomacy. Understanding and leveraging reciprocity can significantly enhance interpersonal relationships, negotiation outcomes, and social dynamics. It plays a crucial role in marketing strategies, customer relations, and even in the development of trust and loyalty.

real=
Gift-Giving Cultures: Many cultures practice elaborate gift-giving rituals, where the exchange of gifts serves to strengthen bonds and express social ties. The expectation of reciprocity ensures that these gestures lead to a deepening of mutual respect and understanding, reinforcing social networks.
\n\nBusiness and Marketing: Companies often use the principle of reciprocity in their marketing efforts, such as offering free samples to potential customers. This act of generosity can create a sense of obligation among recipients, making them more likely to make a purchase or recommend the business to others.
\n\nWorkplace Dynamics: Acts of reciprocity in the workplace, such as helping a colleague with a project or offering support during challenging times, can foster a collaborative and supportive work environment. This mutual assistance helps build a culture of trust and cooperation, leading to improved morale and productivity.

Loss Aversion: =
Loss aversion is a concept from behavioral economics and psychology that describes people's tendency to prefer avoiding losses to acquiring equivalent gains. It's a principle suggesting that the pain of losing is psychologically about twice as powerful as the pleasure of gaining. This asymmetry in emotional impact influences a wide range of decision-making behaviors, leading individuals to make choices that minimize losses even when those choices might not be in their best interest from a purely rational standpoint. Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky introduced loss aversion in their seminal work on prospect theory, highlighting it as a fundamental driver behind human attitudes towards risk and uncertainty.
\n\nLoss aversion can be observed in various aspects of life, from financial investments to everyday choices, affecting how people assess risk, value possessions, and react to change. Understanding loss aversion helps explain behaviors like why individuals stick with the status quo, sell winning investments too early while holding on to losing ones, or why they might overweight small risks when making decisions.

real=
Financial Decision-Making: Investors might exhibit loss aversion by holding onto losing stocks in hopes of breaking even, rather than selling at a loss and investing in other opportunities. This behavior can lead to greater financial losses over time, as individuals are reluctant to accept a sure loss, even if it's the rational choice.
\n\nConsumer Behavior: The endowment effect, closely related to loss aversion, describes why people often demand much more to give up an object than they would be willing to pay to acquire it. For example, homeowners might value their property above market rate, making it difficult to sell, because the potential loss from selling at a lower price feels more significant than the gain.
\n\nPolicy and Change Resistance: In organizational and policy contexts, loss aversion can lead to resistance against new initiatives or reforms. Individuals or groups might oppose changes due to the fear of losing existing benefits or privileges, even if the overall benefits of the change could outweigh the losses.

Simplicity Theory:=
Simplicity Theory, closely associated with the concept of Occam's Razor, emphasizes the preference for the simplest explanation that still accounts for all observed phenomena. This theory suggests that among competing hypotheses, the one with the fewest assumptions should be selected. The drive for simplicity underlies much of scientific inquiry, decision-making, and even aesthetic appreciation, reflecting a universal human inclination to favor clarity and efficiency.
\n\nSimplicity Theory is not just an abstract principle but a practical guide in various fields, including design, communication, education, and problem-solving. It advocates for minimizing complexity unless it adds significant value, thereby making information, products, and systems more accessible, understandable, and usable. Embracing simplicity can lead to more effective communication, more intuitive designs, and solutions that are easier to implement and maintain.

real=
Scientific Theories: In science, simplicity is a guiding principle for theory development. When faced with multiple explanations for a phenomenon, scientists tend to favor the simplest one that accounts for all the data. This approach has led to the development of elegant theories that explain complex realities in straightforward terms, such as Newton's laws of motion or Einstein's theory of relativity.
\n\nProduct Design: The principle of simplicity in product design is epitomized by companies like Apple, which prioritize clean, minimalist designs that enhance user experience. This focus on simplicity has not only set new standards in design aesthetics but has also proven to be highly effective in making technology more approachable and intuitive for users.
\n\nLifestyle Choices: The growing popularity of minimalist lifestyles, where individuals seek to reduce clutter and focus on what's truly important, reflects simplicity theory's relevance beyond professional domains. By prioritizing simplicity, people aim to reduce stress, increase focus, and find more satisfaction in fewer, more meaningful possessions and experiences.

Mental Accounting: =
Mental accounting is a concept in behavioral economics that describes how people categorize, evaluate, and mentally allocate their money into different 'accounts' or budgets based on subjective criteria. This mental segmentation can significantly influence spending, saving, and investment decisions, often leading to irrational financial behaviors. The term was coined by economist Richard Thaler, highlighting the cognitive processes that cause individuals to treat money differently depending on its source, intended use, or other psychological labels applied to it.
\n\nMental accounting reveals why people might splurge with a windfall while being frugal with their regular income, or why they keep money in a low-interest savings account while carrying high-interest debt. Understanding mental accounting can help individuals make more rational and cohesive financial decisions by recognizing these cognitive biases.

real=
Windfall Gains: People often treat unexpected money, such as tax refunds, bonuses, or lottery winnings, differently from regular earnings. This "found money" might be more readily spent on luxuries or non-essential items due to its categorization as extra or bonus funds, rather than being allocated to savings or debt repayment.
\n\nSpending Habits: Mental accounting can explain why someone might drive across town to save $10 on a $20 item but not bother to do the same for a $10 saving on a $500 item. The perceived value of the saving is mentally accounted for differently based on the context or 'account' it's placed in, even though the absolute saving is the same.
\n\nBudget Segregation: Individuals might mentally allocate specific budgets for dining, entertainment, or groceries and resist using funds from one category for another, even when facing a shortfall. This segregation can lead to inefficient use of resources, such as forgoing necessary purchases or indulging in unnecessary ones based on these arbitrary allocations.


Prospect Theory: =
Prospect Theory, developed by Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky in 1979, is a cornerstone of behavioral economics that describes how people choose between probabilistic alternatives involving risk, where the probabilities of outcomes are known. The theory posits that people value gains and losses differently, leading to decision-making that deviates from expected utility theory. Essentially, losses loom larger than gains, and people are more sensitive to changes in their status quo than to the absolute value of their wealth.
\n\nProspect Theory introduces several key concepts, such as loss aversion (the idea that losses are perceived as more significant than equivalent gains), the endowment effect (valuing what one owns more highly than what one does not), and framing effects (the impact of how choices are presented on decision-making). These concepts have profound implications for understanding consumer behavior, financial decision-making, and policy design, illustrating the complexity of human attitudes towards risk and reward.

real=
Investment Choices: Prospect theory can explain why investors might irrationally hold onto losing stocks to avoid realizing a loss, a behavior known as the disposition effect. The pain associated with locking in a loss outweighs the rational decision to minimize future losses by selling the underperforming asset.
\n\nInsurance Purchasing: People often buy insurance to avoid potential losses, even when the cost of the insurance over time exceeds the expected loss. This behavior, driven by loss aversion, shows a preference for paying a known cost to avoid the possibility of a larger, though less probable, loss.
\n\nMarketing and Pricing Strategies: Marketers use framing to influence consumer decisions, presenting options in a way that highlights potential losses or gains. For example, framing a discount as avoiding a loss ("Save $10") can be more effective than framing it as a gain ("Get $10 off"), tapping into the loss aversion described by prospect theory.

Regression to the Mean:=
Regression to the mean is a statistical phenomenon that occurs when extreme or unusual outcomes are followed by outcomes that are closer to the average or mean on subsequent attempts or measurements. This concept is critical in understanding patterns within data sets across various domains, including sports performance, business metrics, and medical treatments. It highlights the natural variability and tendency of systems to stabilize over time.
\n\nThe principle was first introduced by Sir Francis Galton in the context of hereditary statures, noting that extremely tall parents tended to have shorter children relative to their height, and vice versa, with the children's heights regressing towards the population mean. Understanding regression to the mean helps in making accurate predictions and interpretations from data, avoiding the misattribution of causes to purely random variations.

real=
Sports Performance: A player who scores exceptionally high in one game is likely to score closer to their average in subsequent games, not necessarily due to a decrease in skill but as a natural statistical correction. Similarly, a player with a surprisingly low score is likely to improve simply due to chance.
\n\nBusiness Sales Fluctuations: A company might experience an unusually high revenue quarter due to factors such as seasonal demand or a successful marketing campaign. Expecting future revenues to continue at this level without recognizing the effect of regression to the mean could lead to overestimation and misallocation of resources.
\n\nMedical Treatment Efficacy: In clinical trials, patients with extreme symptoms might show significant improvement after treatment. However, part of this improvement may be attributed to regression to the mean, as those initially experiencing severe symptoms naturally move closer to average outcomes over time, regardless of the treatment.

Availability Heuristic:=
\n\nThe Availability Heuristic is a mental shortcut identified by psychologists Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman, which relies on immediate examples that come to a person’s mind when evaluating a specific topic, concept, method, or decision. This heuristic operates under the premise that if something can be recalled easily, it must be important or at least more common than alternatives not as readily recalled. While often useful for quick judgments, the availability heuristic can lead to biased thinking and decision-making, particularly when the examples that come to mind are not representative of the actual situation or when they are influenced by recent events, media coverage, or personal experiences.

real=
Perception of Risk: After hearing news reports about airplane accidents, individuals might overestimate the dangers of flying due to the vividness and emotional impact of such reports, despite statistics showing that air travel is safer than car travel on a per-mile basis.
\n\nHealth Concerns: The sudden outbreak of a disease or widespread media coverage of a health scare can lead people to believe that such illnesses are more common than they are, influencing their behavior and perceptions of health risks disproportionately.
\n\nInvestment Decisions: Investors might base their decisions on the most recent performance of the stock market or a particular stock, leading to reactive rather than strategic investing. If the market has been doing well recently, they might assume it will continue to do so, ignoring longer-term trends and fundamentals.


Representativeness Heuristic: =
The Representativeness Heuristic is a mental shortcut that involves judging the probability of an event or the likelihood of an object belonging to a category based on how much it resembles the typical case within that category. Developed by psychologists Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky, this heuristic simplifies complex decision-making processes by relying on an instinctual comparison rather than thorough analysis. While this can be efficient, it often leads to cognitive biases such as base rate neglect and the conjunction fallacy, where individuals ignore statistical information in favor of anecdotal evidence or fail to consider that specific conditions are less probable than a single general one.

real = 
Job Candidate Assessment: Hiring managers might rely on the representativeness heuristic when evaluating candidates, assuming someone from a prestigious university with a certain degree is automatically a better fit for a job, overlooking other candidates with diverse but relevant experiences.
\n\nMedical Diagnosis: Doctors might diagnose a common illness based on symptoms that appear representative of that illness, potentially overlooking a rarer but more accurate diagnosis that doesn't fit the typical presentation as closely.
\n\nInvestment Decisions: Investors might see a company in a booming industry and assume it will be successful, mirroring the industry's average without considering the company's specific situation, leading to misplaced investments.

Framing Effect: =
The Framing Effect describes how people react differently to a particular choice or judgment depending on how it is presented, or "framed," whether as a loss or a gain. This cognitive bias, extensively studied by Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman, demonstrates that the context in which information is presented can significantly influence decision-making and judgment. The framing effect is pivotal in understanding human behavior in economics, politics, health communication, and any area where choice presentation affects decision outcomes.
\n\nFraming can alter the perceived value of options and lead to inconsistencies in preferences, where individuals may choose a risk-averse option when a positive frame is used (emphasizing gains) and a risk-seeking option under a negative frame (highlighting losses). This effect underscores the non-rational nature of human decision-making, suggesting that individuals are not always utility maximizers in the traditional economic sense but are influenced by the presentation and emotional impact of information.

real=
Medical Decision-Making: The way treatment options are presented can significantly affect patient choices. For example, a surgery might be described in terms of a 90% survival rate (gain frame) or a 10% mortality rate (loss frame), leading to different emotional responses and choices, even though the statistical probability is the same.
\n\nEnvironmental Policy: Public support for environmental policies can depend on framing. Highlighting the positive impact of conservation efforts on wildlife preservation (gain frame) may elicit more support than emphasizing the consequences of inaction, such as species extinction (loss frame).
\n\nFinancial Planning: The framing of financial products, such as highlighting the potential gains from an investment plan versus the risks of loss, can influence individuals' willingness to invest. Similarly, framing a retirement plan in terms of the income it can provide (gain) rather than the costs associated with it (loss) can affect participation rates.

Stereotyping: =
Stereotyping is a cognitive process where individuals assign specific attributes, characteristics, or roles to others based on their membership in a particular social group, often without considering the individual's unique qualities and behaviors. This mental shortcut allows people to quickly categorize and respond to social information, but it also leads to overgeneralizations and biases. Stereotypes can be based on a range of factors, including race, gender, age, profession, and nationality, and they significantly impact interpersonal interactions, decision-making, and societal dynamics.
\n\nStereotypes arise from the human tendency to simplify complex social worlds by grouping similar things together. While they can sometimes be based on observable trends or experiences, stereotypes do not accurately represent all members of a group and can lead to prejudice and discrimination when used as the basis for judgments or actions. Acknowledging and challenging stereotypical thinking is crucial for fostering understanding, equality, and respect in diverse societies.

real=
Employment Decisions: In the workplace, stereotyping can influence hiring, promotion, and evaluation processes. For example, assuming that women are less suited for leadership roles than men can lead to gender disparities in executive positions, irrespective of individual abilities and qualifications.
\n\nEducational Opportunities: Stereotypes about intellectual capabilities based on race or ethnicity can affect teachers' expectations and interactions with students, influencing students' academic performance and self-esteem, and potentially creating self-fulfilling prophecies.
\n\nMedia Representation: Media often perpetuates stereotypes by consistently depicting certain groups in limited or biased roles, shaping public perception and reinforcing existing stereotypes. For instance, portraying minority groups primarily in criminal or subservient roles can influence societal attitudes and perpetuate prejudice.

Confirmation Bias:=
Confirmation bias is the tendency to search for, interpret, favor, and remember information in a way that confirms one's preexisting beliefs or hypotheses, while giving disproportionately less consideration to alternative possibilities. This cognitive bias affects individuals across various domains, including decision-making, reasoning, and emotional reactions. Confirmation bias can lead to overconfidence in personal beliefs and can limit one's ability to make objective decisions. It plays a significant role in how information is gathered, interpreted, and recalled, often leading to a skewed perception of reality.
\n\nConfirmation bias is not just a passive process of favoring agreeable information but an active pursuit of evidence that supports one's views, leading to the dismissal or undervaluation of contrary evidence. This bias can perpetuate stereotypes, contribute to groupthink, and exacerbate division on contentious issues by leading individuals to only consume information that aligns with their views.

real=
Social Media Echo Chambers: Online platforms can amplify confirmation bias through algorithms that feed users content similar to what they've liked or engaged with before, creating an echo chamber where one's beliefs are constantly reinforced without exposure to contrasting viewpoints.
\n\nPolitical Opinions: People tend to select news sources and communities that align with their political beliefs, reinforcing their views without considering opposing evidence. This can deepen ideological divides and hinder constructive dialogue between differing viewpoints.
\n\nInvestment Decisions: Investors might focus on positive news regarding a stock they own, ignoring negative indicators, leading to potentially misguided investment choices based on an overly optimistic assessment rather than a balanced analysis.

Gambler’s Fallacy: =
The Gambler’s Fallacy, also known as the Monte Carlo Fallacy, is a misconception of probability, where individuals mistakenly believe that past events can influence the likelihood of future events that are truly random. This fallacy often arises in situations of chance, like gambling or lottery, where a streak of one outcome (e.g., flipping a coin and getting heads multiple times in a row) leads to the belief that the opposite outcome (tails, in this case) is due to happen soon, despite each event being independent with a fixed probability.
\n\nThis bias illustrates a fundamental misunderstanding of the law of large numbers and independence in statistics. The Gambler’s Fallacy can lead to poor decision-making, as it biases individuals to expect reversals following streaks, potentially influencing financial, legal, and personal choices based on erroneous assumptions about how random events operate.

real=
Casino Gambling: A classic example occurs in roulette, where if the ball has landed on black several times consecutively, players might erroneously bet large sums on red, believing it is more likely to occur next. Each spin is independent, and the odds remain the same, regardless of previous outcomes.
\n\nSports: Fans and players might believe a baseball player on a hitting streak is “due” for a hit or, conversely, a hitless streak means a hit is coming soon. This belief can affect betting and strategic decisions, ignoring the statistical reality that each at-bat is an independent event with its own probability of success.
\n\nFinancial Markets: Investors might perceive that a stock or market that has been falling for consecutive days is due to rebound (or vice versa), leading to investment decisions based on pattern recognition rather than analysis of underlying fundamentals.

Hindsight Bias: =
Hindsight bias, often referred to as the "knew-it-all-along" effect, is a cognitive bias that involves the tendency of people to perceive events that have already occurred as having been more predictable than they actually were before the events took place. This bias can lead to oversimplification in understanding cause and effect, distortion of memories of what was known or believed before an event, and an overconfidence in one's ability to predict future events based on past outcomes.
\n\nThe phenomenon was extensively studied by psychologists Baruch Fischhoff and Ruth Beyth, who demonstrated how knowledge of an outcome influences our perception of its inevitability. This bias affects various domains, including legal judgments, financial investing, and personal decision-making, by making events seem inevitable in retrospect, thereby skewing learning processes and accountability assessments.

real=
Financial Market Analysis: After a significant market downturn or crash, analysts and investors might claim the signs were obvious and predictable, despite the wide range of opinions and uncertainty preceding the event. This hindsight bias can lead to misplaced confidence in predicting future market movements.
\n\nMedical Diagnoses: Once a diagnosis is confirmed, doctors might believe the diagnosis was more apparent from the start than it truly was, potentially overlooking the diagnostic process's uncertainties and complexities.
\n\nHistorical Events: People often interpret historical events as being more inevitable than they were, failing to appreciate the contingency of past decisions and the unpredictability faced by decision-makers at the time. For example, the outcome of a political election or a military conflict might seem obvious in hindsight, ignoring the influence of unforeseen factors and decisions.

Hyperbolic Discounting:=
Hyperbolic discounting is a behavioral economics concept that describes how people disproportionately value immediate rewards over future rewards, even when the future rewards are significantly larger. This tendency leads to choices that favor short-term gratification at the expense of long-term benefit, reflecting a nonlinear perception of time in decision-making processes. The term 'hyperbolic' refers to the mathematical model that best fits this time-inconsistent behavior, as opposed to the exponential discounting assumed by traditional economic models which suggest a consistent valuation of future benefits.
\n\nThis concept explains a wide range of everyday behaviors and challenges, including procrastination, the difficulty in saving for retirement, and the tendency to engage in unhealthy habits. Hyperbolic discounting underscores the conflict between our 'present self' and 'future self,' highlighting the psychological struggle in prioritizing long-term goals over immediate desires.

real=
Savings and Financial Planning: Many individuals find it challenging to save money for the future, such as for retirement, preferring instead to spend money on immediate pleasures or needs. This behavior can lead to inadequate savings and financial insecurity in later years, despite the known benefits of early and consistent saving.
\n\nHealth and Fitness: People often choose immediate pleasures, such as eating unhealthy food or skipping exercise, over the long-term health benefits of a healthier lifestyle. Even when aware of the long-term consequences, the immediate satisfaction outweighs future health improvements in the decision-making process.
\n\nProcrastination: Hyperbolic discounting plays a significant role in procrastination, where individuals delay tasks with future benefits in favor of more immediately rewarding activities, even when this delay may lead to negative consequences.


Negativity Bias: =
Negativity bias is a psychological phenomenon where negative events, emotions, or information have a greater effect on one's psychological state and processes than neutral or positive things. This bias suggests that things of a more negative nature (such as unpleasant thoughts, emotions, or social interactions) will have a bigger impact on a person's psychological state and processes than neutral or positive things, even if they are of equal intensity. The concept, extensively explored by researchers including Roy Baumeister, highlights the evolutionary aspect of human cognition, where paying more attention to negative threats was crucial for survival.
\n\nNegativity bias influences a wide range of behaviors and perceptions, from individual decision-making and relationship dynamics to media consumption patterns. It can lead to a skewed perception of the world, contribute to stress and anxiety, and affect decision-making processes, often leading to risk-averse or pessimistic outcomes.

real=
News Consumption: People are drawn to and remember negative news more vividly than positive news. Media outlets, knowing this, often focus more on negative stories, which can skew public perception of the world towards the negative, affecting mood and outlook on life.
\n\nSocial Interactions: Negative comments or experiences in social settings tend to be remembered more clearly and have a more lasting impact than positive ones. This can affect relationships and social dynamics, where a single negative experience might outweigh numerous positive interactions.
\n\nRisk Assessment: In decision-making, the potential losses tend to weigh more heavily on people's minds than equivalent gains. This can lead to overly cautious behavior or aversion to risk, even when the potential benefits outweigh the risks.

Optimism Bias: =
Optimism bias is a cognitive bias that causes individuals to believe they are less likely to experience negative events and more likely to experience positive events in the future compared to others. This bias reflects an error in subjective probability estimation, where people underestimate the chances of encountering adverse situations such as illness, accidents, or financial problems, while overestimating their prospects for success in areas like career, relationships, and life achievements.
\n\nThe optimism bias plays a crucial role in motivating individuals by fostering a positive outlook on life, but it can also lead to inadequate preparation for potential risks and challenges. Recognizing and understanding this bias is essential for balancing hopeful expectations with realistic planning and risk assessment.

real=
Health Risks: Many people underestimate their likelihood of developing health issues, such as heart disease or cancer, believing these problems are more prevalent among others. This optimism can lead to neglecting preventive health measures, screenings, and lifestyle changes that could mitigate these risks.
\n\nFinancial Planning: Individuals often overestimate their future financial prosperity, assuming they'll earn more and face fewer financial setbacks than statistically likely. This can result in insufficient savings for retirement, lack of emergency funds, and overly optimistic investment decisions.
\n\nProject Planning: In both personal and professional settings, people tend to assume projects will take less time and resources than they actually do, a phenomenon known as the planning fallacy, which is closely related to optimism bias. This leads to unrealistic timelines, budget overruns, and stress.


Planning Fallacy:=
The Planning Fallacy is a cognitive bias that causes people to underestimate the time, costs, and risks of future actions while overestimating the benefits. Coined by psychologists Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky, it is a phenomenon observed in various planning and forecasting activities, where individuals and organizations are overly optimistic about their capacity to complete tasks within a set timeframe. This bias affects a wide range of projects, from everyday tasks to large-scale infrastructure projects, leading to delays, cost overruns, and unmet objectives.
\n\nDespite ample evidence of past overruns and missed deadlines, both individuals and planners tend to fall prey to this optimism, often attributing setbacks to external or one-off factors rather than systematic underestimation. The Planning Fallacy underscores the human tendency to focus on the best-case scenarios, ignoring the statistical probabilities and historical performance data that suggest otherwise.

real=
Personal Projects: Whether it's home renovation, learning a new skill, or completing a work assignment, people frequently set unrealistic timelines for themselves, underestimating the complexities and potential obstacles, leading to stress and frustration when goals are not met as anticipated.
\n\nSoftware Development: In the tech industry, projects often run over schedule and budget due to the planning fallacy. Developers might underestimate the time required to write, test, and debug code, leading to delayed product launches and dissatisfied stakeholders.
\n\nPublic Infrastructure Projects: Large-scale projects, like building bridges, highways, or stadiums, frequently experience significant delays and budget increases. Planners often ignore potential challenges and setbacks, resulting in costs that far exceed initial estimates.

Risk Compensation: =
Risk Compensation is a theory suggesting that people adjust their behavior in response to the perceived level of risk, becoming more cautious when they sense greater risk and less cautious when they feel more protected. This adjustment in behavior can offset the benefits of safety measures and regulations, as individuals may take greater risks when they believe their safety is assured by external factors, such as safety equipment or technological innovations. The concept has implications across various domains, including public health, transportation safety, and sports, challenging the assumption that increased safety measures always lead directly to reduced risk-taking and fewer accidents.
\n\nThe phenomenon highlights the complex interplay between human psychology, perceived safety, and actual risk, underscoring the importance of considering behavioral responses when designing and implementing safety interventions. Risk compensation suggests that merely introducing safety measures without addressing underlying behaviors and attitudes towards risk may not lead to the expected outcomes in reducing harm.

real=
Automobile Safety Features: The introduction of advanced safety features in vehicles, such as anti-lock braking systems (ABS) and electronic stability control, might lead some drivers to drive more aggressively, assuming these technologies will protect them from the consequences of dangerous driving behaviors.
\n\nSports Safety Equipment: In sports like American football or cycling, wearing protective gear such as helmets may lead athletes to engage in riskier maneuvers or play more aggressively, believing the equipment will mitigate the risks of injury.
\n\nPublic Health Measures: In the context of infectious disease control, the availability of preventive measures (e.g., vaccines, prophylactics) might lead to complacency or riskier health behaviors among some individuals, assuming these measures completely eliminate the risk of infection.

Survivorship Bias:=
Survivorship bias is a logical error of concentrating on the people or things that made it past some selection process and overlooking those that did not, often because of their lack of visibility. This bias can lead to overly optimistic beliefs because failures are ignored, as only successes are seen. The term is used in various contexts, including finance, business, history, and psychology, to explain how focusing solely on survivors skews our understanding of reality. Survivorship bias can cause us to misjudge the chances of success, as the failures that would provide a more balanced view are obscured or forgotten.
\n\nThe concept was popularized in part by statistician Abraham Wald, who during World War II suggested that military aircraft should be reinforced in areas that showed no damage on returning planes. His rationale was that planes hit in those undamaged areas were not surviving to return home, highlighting an instance of survivorship bias in military strategy.

real=
Investment Funds: Financial analysts might assess the performance of mutual funds over a period, but if they only consider funds that exist at the end of the period, they ignore those that performed poorly and were closed or merged. This can lead to inflated average returns for the sector.
\n\nEntrepreneurial Success: The media often highlights successful entrepreneurs, creating a perception that success is more common than it actually is. Failures, being less visible, are underreported, which can skew aspiring entrepreneurs' understanding of the risks involved in startups.
\n\nMedical Treatments: Survivorship bias can occur in non-randomized studies of treatment outcomes, where only the subjects who survived or remained in the study are analyzed. This may lead to overly positive interpretations of a treatment's effectiveness.


Tragedy of the Commons: =
The Tragedy of the Commons is a concept in economics and environmental science describing a situation where individual users, acting independently according to their own self-interest, deplete or spoil shared resources, even though it is contrary to the group's long-term best interests. This theory was popularized by Garrett Hardin in his 1968 essay, but the idea has been understood in various forms for centuries. It highlights the conflict between individual interests and the common good, particularly in the management of shared resources like fisheries, forests, grazing lands, and the atmosphere.
\n\nThe Tragedy of the Commons occurs because each individual considers that the benefit from exploiting the resource accrues to them, while the cost of its depletion is distributed among all users. Therefore, the incentive for each user is to increase use of the resource, leading to unsustainable exploitation. This concept is often cited in discussions of environmental degradation, overfishing, and pollution, and it underscores the need for effective management and conservation strategies for shared resources.

real=
Overfishing: In international waters, where no single country has jurisdiction, the lack of effective management leads to overfishing. Fishermen, motivated by immediate profits, catch fish at a rate that exceeds the fish population's ability to reproduce, leading to fish stock depletion.
\n\nAir Pollution: The atmosphere is a common resource that can suffer from the tragedy of the commons. Individual companies may find it economically beneficial to emit pollutants into the air, but if all companies do this, air quality worsens, affecting health and the environment for the entire community.
\n\nPublic Land Overuse: Public lands open for grazing and recreation can become degraded when too many users, such as ranchers or tourists, use the resource beyond its capacity to naturally regenerate, leading to soil erosion, loss of vegetation, and decreased biodiversity.

Zero-Sum Game:=
A zero-sum game represents a scenario in game theory and economic situations where one participant's gain or loss is exactly offset by the losses or gains of the other participants. This concept is instrumental in illustrating the nature of competitive environments where the total value remains constant across the distribution, implying that the success of one entity comes at the direct expense of another. Originating from the mathematical modeling of strategic interaction in game theory, zero-sum games underpin much of classical economics and competitive strategy, emphasizing scenarios where cooperation does not increase the available resources.
\n\nIn a zero-sum game, the interests of participants are strictly opposed, with every advantage gained by one side mirroring a disadvantage to the other. This framing is critical for understanding conflict, negotiation, and competition, shaping strategies in fields as diverse as international relations, business, sports, and legal disputes. The concept contrasts with non-zero-sum situations, where collaborative approaches can lead to mutual benefits, expanding the total resources or benefits for all involved.

real=
Poker: Poker is a classic example of a zero-sum game. The amount of money won by one player is equivalent to the combined losses of the other players at the table. There is no value creation, only redistribution of wealth among the players.
\n\nTrading Markets: In stock, options, and futures trading, the profit gained by one trader is often directly linked to a loss by another trader. The total wealth in the system remains constant, barring transaction costs.
\n\nInternational Trade Negotiations: In some cases, trade negotiations can be perceived as zero-sum, where the terms benefiting one country are seen to disadvantage another, especially in protective trade policies or tariffs.

Byzantine Generals Problem: =
The Byzantine Generals Problem is a foundational issue in the field of computer science, particularly in the study of distributed computing and systems. Formulated by Leslie Lamport, Robert Shostak, and Marshall Pease in 1982, it illustrates the challenges of achieving consensus in a distributed system where some components may fail or act maliciously. The problem is named after a hypothetical situation where several divisions of the Byzantine army, each commanded by a different general, must agree on a common battle plan. However, they can only communicate through messengers, and some generals may be traitors trying to prevent consensus.
\n\nThis dilemma serves as an allegory for modern distributed systems, where nodes must agree on a shared state or decision, even in the presence of faulty or malicious actors. The Byzantine Generals Problem highlights the necessity for algorithms that ensure reliability and consensus despite these challenges, which is critical for the functioning of fault-tolerant systems across computer networks, cryptocurrencies, and any technology relying on distributed consensus mechanisms.

real=
Cryptocurrency and Blockchain: In the context of blockchain technology and cryptocurrencies, solving the Byzantine Generals Problem is fundamental. Blockchain networks use consensus algorithms like Proof of Work or Proof of Stake to agree on the validity of transactions and the current state of the ledger, despite the network's decentralized nature and the potential for nodes to act maliciously.
\n\nFault-Tolerant Systems: In systems that require high reliability, such as air traffic control, banking systems, and military command and control networks, developing solutions to the Byzantine Generals Problem is crucial. These systems use Byzantine fault tolerance mechanisms to ensure that the failure of a subset of components does not compromise the system's overall integrity.
\n\nDistributed Computing: The problem also underscores the importance of consensus in distributed computing environments, where processes spread across multiple nodes must agree on computations, data values, or the order of events. Achieving consensus in the presence of Byzantine faults is essential for the correctness and reliability of distributed applications.


Prisoner’s Dilemma: =
The Prisoner's Dilemma is a standard example of a game analyzed in game theory that shows why two completely rational individuals might not cooperate, even if it appears that it is in their best interest to do so. It is a fundamental problem in the study of strategic decision-making, ethics, and the understanding of cooperative behavior. The dilemma is framed around two prisoners accused of a crime. If both prisoners betray each other, they each serve a moderate sentence. If one remains silent while the other betrays, the betrayer goes free, and the silent prisoner receives the full sentence. If both remain silent, they both get a minor sentence. This setup creates a situation where mutual cooperation would be beneficial but is hard to achieve due to the incentives to betray for individual gain.
\n\nThe dilemma explores the conflict between self-interest and collective interest, demonstrating the difficulty of achieving optimal outcomes when individuals prioritize personal gain without considering the broader implications of their actions. It has profound implications across multiple disciplines, including economics, politics, and psychology, influencing the understanding of social contracts, negotiation, and conflict resolution.

real=
International Relations: The Prisoner's Dilemma is often used to model the challenges of nuclear disarmament, where mutual cooperation (disarmament) would lead to a more stable world, but the fear of unilateral action (one country disarming while the other does not) leads to an arms race.
\n\nEnvironmental Policy: Environmental protection efforts can be framed as a Prisoner's Dilemma. If all countries reduce pollution, everyone benefits from a healthier planet. However, individual countries might be tempted to enjoy the benefits of clean air and water without bearing the cost of pollution control, leading to environmental degradation.
\n\nBusiness and Economics: In competitive markets, businesses face a similar dilemma regarding pricing, product development, and advertising. Companies might benefit from industry-wide standards and cooperation (such as reducing negative advertising), but the incentive to outdo competitors can lead to outcomes that are suboptimal for all.



The Peter Principle: =
The Peter Principle is a concept in management theory formulated by Dr. Laurence J. Peter in his 1969 book titled "The Peter Principle." The principle suggests that in a hierarchical organization, employees tend to be promoted based on their performance in their current role, rather than on their abilities relevant to the intended role. Consequently, employees will continue to be promoted until they reach a level of respective incompetence, a position in which they are no longer competent. This observation highlights a critical flaw in typical promotion practices within organizations, leading to inefficiency and stagnation as employees reach positions where they can no longer perform effectively.
\n\nThe principle challenges the conventional merit-based promotion systems, advocating for a more nuanced approach to career advancement that considers an individual's suitability for higher-level positions beyond their current performance. It underscores the importance of recognizing and developing different skill sets required at various organizational levels and the need for robust training and support systems to prepare employees for new challenges as they ascend the organizational hierarchy.

real=
Organizational Efficiency: The Peter Principle can lead to widespread organizational inefficiency, as key positions may be filled with individuals ill-suited to their responsibilities, compromising decision-making and leadership within the organization.
\n\nEmployee Morale: The realization or perception of reaching a level of incompetence can significantly impact employee morale and job satisfaction. Individuals may feel trapped in roles they find challenging without a clear path for advancement or improvement.
\n\nInnovation and Adaptability: Organizations riddled with the consequences of the Peter Principle may struggle with innovation and adaptability. When key positions are held by those lacking the necessary skills, it can hinder the organization's ability to respond to changes and innovate, affecting its competitive edge.


Parkinson’s Law: =
Parkinson's Law, articulated by Cyril Northcote Parkinson in 1955, is an adage that asserts, "Work expands to fill the time available for its completion." This observation suggests that the amount of time one allocates for a task is the amount of time it will take to complete the task, often regardless of how much work is actually necessary. Initially framed in the context of bureaucratic inefficiency, where organizations become bloated and inefficient as officials and employees create work to justify their roles, Parkinson's Law has broader implications for productivity, time management, and organizational efficiency.
\n\nThe principle highlights a tendency towards inefficiency and procrastination within tasks and projects. It serves as a cautionary note about the dangers of flexible deadlines and the value of imposing stricter time constraints to enhance productivity and prevent work from becoming unnecessarily prolonged.

real=
Project Management: In the realm of project management, Parkinson's Law can lead to projects consuming all available resources and time, even if they could have been completed sooner with more focused effort. This underscores the importance of setting realistic, but stringent, deadlines to ensure efficient workflow and resource utilization.
\n\nPersonal Productivity: On a personal level, Parkinson’s Law reflects how individuals might unnecessarily extend tasks to fill the time they have available, leading to decreased productivity. For example, given a week to prepare a presentation, one might use the entire week, even if the core work could be completed in a day or two.
\n\nOrganizational Growth: Parkinson’s Law also touches on how organizations tend to expand over time through increased staffing and bureaucracy, often without a corresponding increase in the volume of work or productivity. This can lead to inflated budgets and decreased agility within the organization.


Moore’s Law: =
Moore's Law is a prediction made by Gordon Moore, co-founder of Intel, in 1965, stating that the number of transistors on a microchip would double approximately every two years, while the cost of computers would be halved. Moore observed this trend in the early history of computing hardware, noting the rapid pace at which computing power was increasing. Over time, Moore's Law has been interpreted more broadly to suggest the exponential growth of computing power and the efficiency of digital electronics, encompassing advancements in processing speed, memory capacity, sensors, and even the number and size of pixels in digital cameras.
\n\nThis law has profound implications for technological advancement, economic growth, and the development of new technologies. It has been a driving force behind the Information Age, enabling the miniaturization of devices, the proliferation of smartphones, the advancement of artificial intelligence, and the feasibility of big data analytics. Moore's Law reflects both the challenges and opportunities in scaling production and innovation in semiconductor technology.

real=
Consumer Electronics: The exponential increase in computing power has led to the development of more powerful, smaller, and cheaper consumer electronics, transforming smartphones into powerful computing devices that fit in our pockets.
\n\nComputational Capabilities: The growth predicted by Moore's Law has facilitated significant advancements in computational capabilities, enabling complex simulations, machine learning algorithms, and the processing of vast amounts of data in science, medicine, and research.
\n\nTechnological Innovation: The expectation of continuous improvement in processing power has fueled innovation across sectors, driving companies to invest in research and development to create new applications and services that leverage increased computing capabilities.

Lindy Effect: =
The Lindy Effect is a concept and observed phenomenon that suggests the future life expectancy of some non-perishable things, like technology, ideas, or even careers, is proportional to their current age. Essentially, the longer something non-perishable has been around, the longer it is likely to continue into the future. This concept is notably applied in the realms of cultural products, technologies, and ideas, suggesting that those that have endured the test of time are likely to remain relevant longer than newer alternatives.
\n\nOriginating from a 1964 article in The New Republic magazine, which described a peculiar observation made by comedians at Lindy's restaurant in New York City regarding the future career longevity of their peers, the Lindy Effect was later popularized and expanded by Nassim Nicholas Taleb in his discussions on probability and uncertainty. Taleb emphasized its implications for understanding the durability and robustness of things, arguing that the effect is a powerful heuristic for evaluating the potential longevity of non-biological entities.

real=
Cultural and Literary Works: Books, music, and art that have been appreciated and valued across generations suggest a certain timelessness and universal appeal, implying that they will continue to be valued. For instance, the works of Shakespeare or Beethoven have been cherished for centuries, indicating their likelihood to be appreciated for centuries more.
\n\nTechnologies and Innovations: In technology, older foundational technologies that have been widely adopted and integrated into the fabric of society, like the internet or the QWERTY keyboard layout, are likely to persist, evolving rather than being abruptly replaced.
\n\nIdeas and Philosophies: Philosophical ideas or theories that have influenced thought for generations, such as those of Aristotle or Confucius, demonstrate a resilience and adaptability that suggests their continued relevance and discussion into the future.

Black Swan Theory: =
The Black Swan Theory, developed by Nassim Nicholas Taleb, describes the profound impact of highly improbable and unpredictable events that have massive consequences. In his 2007 book "The Black Swan," Taleb argues that these rare and unpredictable events underpin almost everything about our world, yet we often ignore them until after they occur, rationalizing them as more predictable than they truly are. The term "black swan" comes from the ancient Western conception that all swans were white because all historical records of swans reported them as white; the discovery of black swans in Australia disrupted this belief, symbolizing the idea that a single observation can invalidate a general statement derived from centuries of confirmatory sightings.
\n\nBlack Swan events have three primary attributes: rarity, extreme impact, and retrospective predictability. Financial market crashes, natural disasters, and technological innovations can all be considered Black Swans, phenomena that are outside the realm of regular expectations and bring about a shift in understanding or approach.

real=
Financial Crashes: The 2008 financial crisis is often cited as a Black Swan event. Despite the global financial system's complexity and interconnectivity, the severity of the crisis and its widespread impact were largely unforeseen by economists and analysts, demonstrating the devastating effect of highly improbable events.
\n\nTechnological Breakthroughs: The advent of the internet and its revolutionary impact on communication, business, and society was a Black Swan. Its emergence and rapid adoption around the world were not predicted, and it has reshaped every aspect of modern life.
\n\nPandemics: The COVID-19 pandemic can be considered a Black Swan event, given its sudden emergence, global spread, and profound impact on health, economies, and daily life worldwide. Despite the history of pandemics, the scale and speed of COVID-19's disruption were largely unexpected.

UPDATE mentalmodels
SET bigdescription = E'Inversion',
SET realexamples = E'Inversion',
WHERE modelid='b4327f33-cd4d-431e-83b6-c7209ccdebb8';

UPDATE mentalmodels
SET bigdescription = E'Supply and Demand',
SET realexamples = E'Supply and Demand',
WHERE modelid='80a83659-b1d4-4a44-9be4-ad3599f99a44'; 

UPDATE mentalmodels
SET bigdescription = E'Opportunity Cost',
SET realexamples = E'Opportunity Cost',
WHERE modelid='1b1291fd-36f8-4d11-8ed9-6b2b7903747a';

UPDATE mentalmodels
SET bigdescription = E'Sunk Cost Fallacy',
SET realexamples = E'Sunk Cost Fallacy',
WHERE modelid='d00716fe-5da8-41ca-a90f-7950f0831b2f';


UPDATE mentalmodels
SET bigdescription = E'Confirmation Bias',
SET realexamples = E'Confirmation Bias',
WHERE modelid='b3905909-6570-4316-bd66-b415e729a3f6';

UPDATE mentalmodels
SET bigdescription = E'Compound Interest',
SET realexamples = E'Compound Interest',
WHERE modelid='ce2ae652-9537-4580-9bf0-4ac1318cd47b';

UPDATE mentalmodels
SET bigdescription = E'Pareto Principle (80/20 Rule)',
SET realexamples = E'Pareto Principle (80/20 Rule)',
WHERE modelid='125423ba-b160-435d-982b-10d0a2aebeb4';


UPDATE mentalmodels
SET bigdescription = E'Occam’s Razor',
SET realexamples = E'Occam’s Razor',
WHERE modelid='b7afcbfe-a35c-44df-b777-c49bd1670bc0';

UPDATE mentalmodels
SET bigdescription = E'Cognitive dissonance is a psychological concept that describes the mental discomfort experienced by an individual who holds two or more contradictory beliefs, ideas, or values at the same time. Introduced by psychologist Leon Festinger in the 1950s, this theory is fundamental in understanding human behavior, motivation, and attitude change. Cognitive dissonance occurs because humans have an innate drive for internal consistency and harmony among their cognitions (beliefs and attitudes). When confronted with information or decisions that conflict with existing beliefs, discomfort or dissonance is created, compelling individuals to reduce it through various means, such as changing beliefs, justifying behaviors, or ignoring new information.\n\nThis mental model is crucial in various domains, including decision-making, behavior change, and marketing. Understanding cognitive dissonance helps explain why people sometimes act against their best interests or hold on to beliefs even in the face of contradictory evidence. It also underlines the importance of self-awareness in recognizing and addressing dissonance to make more rational decisions.',
SET realexamples = E'Health Behaviors: A smoker who understands the health risks associated with smoking yet continues to smoke experiences cognitive dissonance. To reduce dissonance, they might justify their behavior by underestimating the health risks, emphasizing the difficulty of quitting, or highlighting the stress-relieving benefits of smoking.\n\nInvestment Decisions: An investor may experience cognitive dissonance after purchasing a stock that performs poorly. Despite evidence suggesting they should sell the stock, the desire to avoid admitting a mistake can lead to justifying the decision by focusing on long-term potential or attributing the poor performance to temporary market conditions.\n\nEnvironmental Attitudes: An individual who values environmental conservation but drives a gas-guzzling vehicle may experience cognitive dissonance. To alleviate this discomfort, they might rationalize their choice by citing the need for safety, the convenience of a larger vehicle, or plans to drive less and reduce their carbon footprint.',
WHERE modelid='aa65f4ae-56fc-44ab-8c2d-3f9d3af2927f';

UPDATE mentalmodels
SET bigdescription = E'The Dunning-Kruger Effect is a cognitive bias in which people with limited knowledge or competence in a particular domain greatly overestimate their own ability, while more knowledgeable people may underestimate their competencies. This phenomenon was identified by social psychologists David Dunning and Justin Kruger in 1999. Their research suggests that the lack of expertise causes individuals to fail to recognize their own inadequacies, leading to a significant overestimation of their own skills. Conversely, competent individuals might assume that tasks easy for them are equally easy for others, leading them to undervalue their own expertise.\n\nThe Dunning-Kruger Effect has wide-reaching implications across education, the workplace, and social interactions. It explains why some individuals might approach complex tasks with unwarranted confidence, while those more qualified may hesitate to share their insights. This effect underlines the importance of feedback, self-awareness, and lifelong learning in personal and professional development.
',
    realexamples = E'Amateur Investors: An amateur investor with minimal market knowledge might place highly risky bets based on a few success stories or superficial analysis, believing they have a knack for picking winners. This overconfidence, driven by the Dunning-Kruger Effect, can lead to significant financial losses as they overlook the complexities of market dynamics.\n\nFirst-time Managers: A newly promoted manager might overestimate their leadership abilities, thinking managing a team is straightforward. Without recognizing the nuances of effective leadership, such as empathy, communication, and strategic thinking, they may face challenges in team dynamics and performance, highlighting the gap between perception and competence.\n\nSocial Media Experts: Individuals may claim expertise in social media based on personal use without understanding the strategic planning, content creation, and analytics involved in professional social media management. This overestimation of their skills can result in ineffective campaigns or advice when applied in a business context.
'
WHERE modelid='25375858-4ac9-4878-9119-fe9cd05f16ae';

UPDATE mentalmodels
SET bigdescription = E'Hanlon''s Razor is a philosophical adage that suggests a way to interpret the actions of others: "Never attribute to malice that which is adequately explained by stupidity." In simpler terms, it advises that one should not assume bad intentions behind someone''s actions when they can just as easily be explained by ignorance or error. This heuristic emphasizes the importance of not jumping to the worst conclusions about others'' motives, especially when simpler explanations exist.\n\nHanlon''s Razor is not just a call for giving people the benefit of the doubt; it''s also a mental model for navigating interpersonal relationships, professional environments, and social interactions more smoothly. By reducing the tendency to perceive malevolence behind every mistake or inconsiderate action, individuals can maintain more positive outlooks and relationships. It encourages patience, understanding, and a focus on problem-solving rather than blame.',
    realexamples = E'Workplace Miscommunications: When an email is accidentally not sent or a message is poorly phrased, leading to confusion, Hanlon''s Razor would suggest considering it a simple mistake rather than an intentional act of sabotage or disrespect. This approach can prevent unnecessary conflict and foster a more forgiving and collaborative workplace culture.\n\nSocial Media Misunderstandings: In the realm of social media, where tone and context are often lost, Hanlon’s Razor advises against assuming malicious intent behind ambiguous posts or comments. Often, these may stem from a lack of awareness about how words might be received rather than an intent to offend.\n\nPublic Figures'' Gaffes: When a public figure makes an ill-informed comment or poorly thought-out statement, applying Hanlon''s Razor would mean considering it could be due to a lack of information or understanding rather than a deliberate attempt to provoke or mislead.
'
WHERE modelid='c9ad8a0a-b6ec-44d4-95db-f467ddd6a808';

UPDATE mentalmodels
SET bigdescription = E'Second-order thinking is a mental model that encourages looking beyond the immediate consequences of decisions to consider further-reaching effects. It involves asking the question, "And then what?" after every outcome to anticipate the chain of actions and reactions that might unfold. This approach contrasts with first-order thinking, which focuses on the initial and most apparent consequences without considering the subtler, longer-term impacts.\n\nHoward Marks, an influential investor, popularized the term, emphasizing its importance in making better investment decisions. However, the application of second-order thinking extends far beyond finance, touching every aspect of life where complex systems and interdependencies exist. It''s a tool for critical thinking that helps identify potential unintended consequences, making it invaluable for strategic planning, policy-making, and personal decision-making.',
    realexamples = E'Environmental Policy: Implementing a new environmental regulation might immediately reduce pollution (first-order effect), but second-order thinking would also consider potential impacts on local businesses, employment, and alternative, potentially worse environmental outcomes if industries move to less regulated regions.\n\nHealthcare Decisions: Introducing a new healthcare treatment or drug may solve a particular health issue (first-order effect), but second-order thinking requires examining potential side effects, long-term health outcomes, and how it might affect patients'' behavior towards other health practices.\n\nTechnology Adoption: The introduction of a new technology platform might initially improve efficiency and user satisfaction (first-order effect), but second-order thinking would delve into how it might change user behavior over time, the impact on competitor behavior, and potential dependencies on the technology that could introduce vulnerabilities.'
WHERE modelid='058d2e11-8747-4b3d-bf1f-283d1c7e02e8';

UPDATE mentalmodels
SET bigdescription = E'The Margin of Safety is a fundamental principle in investing and finance, emphasizing the importance of purchasing assets at a significant discount to their intrinsic value to reduce risk. This concept was popularized by Benjamin Graham, often considered the father of value investing, and further advocated by his famous student, Warren Buffett. The margin of safety acts as a buffer against errors in calculation or unforeseen market downturns, ensuring that even if estimations of value are slightly off, the investment still has a reduced likelihood of incurring a significant loss.\n\nIn essence, the margin of safety is about not paying full price for an asset, to protect oneself against the volatility and unpredictability of the market. It''s a conservative approach that prioritizes preservation of capital over speculative gains, making it a cornerstone of risk-averse investment strategies.',
    realexamples = E'Stock Investing: When an investor analyzes a company and determines its shares are worth $100 based on future cash flows, earnings, and assets, they might only decide to purchase the stock if it''s trading at $70 or less. This $30 difference represents the margin of safety, providing room for error in the valuation process and market fluctuations.\n\nReal Estate: A real estate investor might apply the margin of safety principle by purchasing property at a price well below its estimated market value after renovations. This approach accounts for potential overruns in renovation costs, unexpected market downturns, or difficulties in securing tenants.\n\nBusiness Ventures: Entrepreneurs can apply the margin of safety concept by starting businesses with lower fixed costs and higher gross margins. This financial cushion allows the business to remain viable even if sales dip or unexpected expenses arise, providing a safety net during tough economic times.'
WHERE modelid='96b6e264-2ac4-462d-9074-4345a76533ef';

UPDATE mentalmodels
SET bigdescription = E'The concept of diminishing returns, also known as the law of diminishing returns, is a principle in economics that describes a point at which the level of profits or benefits gained is less than the amount of money or energy invested. It occurs in situations where, after a certain level of performance or capacity has been reached, any additional attempt to improve the output or outcome will result in a decrease in the effectiveness or productivity relative to the resources being invested.\n\nOriginating from the field of agricultural economics, this principle was initially observed by noting that continuously adding more of a single factor of production, such as fertilizer to a crop, while keeping all others constant, eventually yields lower per-unit returns. The concept has since been generalized to various sectors and activities, highlighting a universal law affecting productivity and efficiency across different domains.',
    realexamples = E'Educational Effort: A student may find that studying for five hours straight leads to significant learning and retention. However, beyond this point, each additional hour might contribute less to learning outcomes due to fatigue, indicating diminishing returns on study time. Balancing study with rest becomes essential to optimize learning efficiency.\n\nMarketing Campaigns: A business might increase its advertising budget to attract more customers. Initially, the campaign attracts a significant number of new customers, but as spending continues to increase, the rate of customer acquisition begins to slow down. Here, the business encounters diminishing returns on its advertising investment, suggesting the need to explore other strategies or channels for growth.\n\nExercise and Fitness: In the pursuit of physical fitness, an individual might observe significant improvements in strength and endurance from the initial weeks of a workout regimen. However, as the intensity and duration of workouts increase, the incremental gains in fitness level off, illustrating diminishing returns in the context of physical training. This phenomenon underlines the importance of rest and recovery, as well as varying training methods to continue progress.'
WHERE modelid='3b0ebc53-1f0a-431c-a4bf-2e13b3b13c3c';

UPDATE mentalmodels
SET bigdescription = E'Feedback loops are foundational mechanisms in systems theory, referring to processes where the outputs of a system are circled back and used as inputs. This dynamic can significantly influence the behavior and evolution of the system over time. Feedback loops are categorized into two main types: positive feedback loops, which amplify changes and move the system away from its starting state, leading to exponential growth or decline; and negative feedback loops, which dampen changes, helping the system to stabilize around a set point or equilibrium.\n\nThe concept of feedback loops is prevalent across various disciplines, including biology, ecology, economics, engineering, and psychology, underscoring their universal applicability in understanding complex systems. Recognizing and analyzing feedback loops enable better predictions about system behavior and more effective interventions for desired outcomes.',
    realexamples = E'Climate Change: A positive feedback loop is evident in the melting of polar ice caps. As ice melts, less sunlight is reflected away from the earth''s surface, increasing the absorption of heat and causing temperatures to rise further. This loop accelerates the melting process, contributing to the global warming phenomenon.\n\nPopulation Dynamics: In ecology, negative feedback loops help regulate population sizes. For example, as a prey population increases, it supports a larger population of predators. However, as the predators consume more prey, the prey population decreases, which in turn reduces the predator population. This interaction helps stabilize both populations around an equilibrium point.\n\nEconomic Growth: Economies can experience positive feedback loops through the process of capital accumulation. As businesses invest and grow, they can generate more profits, leading to further investment and growth. This cycle can drive rapid economic expansion but also risks leading to bubbles if not tempered by negative feedback mechanisms, such as market corrections or regulatory interventions.'
WHERE modelid='8aa8a038-c493-4bdb-9f43-9fd70cf0567b';

UPDATE mentalmodels
SET bigdescription = E'Network effects, a key concept in economics and business strategy, describe a scenario where a product or service becomes more valuable as more people use it. This phenomenon is rooted in the idea that the utility and appeal of a product increase with each additional user, creating a positive feedback loop that encourages further adoption. Network effects are pivotal in the success of many digital platforms and technologies, underscoring how interconnectedness can amplify value and competitive advantage.\n\nThere are two primary types of network effects: direct and indirect. Direct network effects refer to situations where a product''s value to any single user increases as the total number of users rises, as seen with communication services like email or social media platforms. Indirect network effects occur when the value of a product increases due to the expansion of a complementary product or service, such as more apps being developed for a widely used operating system.',
    realexamples = E'Social Media Platforms: Platforms like Facebook and Twitter become more engaging and valuable as more users join and contribute content, leading to a richer, more diverse user experience. This increased utility encourages new users to join, further strengthening the network effect.\n\nOnline Marketplaces: E-commerce platforms like eBay and Amazon benefit from network effects. For sellers, the value of the platform increases with the number of potential customers. Conversely, for buyers, the value increases with the variety and quantity of sellers. This dynamic creates a virtuous cycle, attracting more buyers and sellers.\n\nPayment Systems: Payment services like PayPal or credit card networks become more useful as more merchants and consumers adopt them. Consumers find more places where they can use their preferred payment method, and merchants benefit from access to a larger customer base that prefers these payment options.'
WHERE modelid='9d2439cd-8d20-4863-8c29-c0139d4c9403';

UPDATE mentalmodels
SET bigdescription = E'Critical Mass refers to the minimum amount of something required to start or maintain a venture, especially in contexts where the success of an activity or an entity depends significantly on reaching a threshold level of participation, adoption, or investment. Originating from nuclear physics, where it denotes the smallest amount of fissile material needed to sustain a nuclear chain reaction, the concept has been widely applied in social sciences, marketing, and network theory to describe the tipping point at which a product, idea, or behavior becomes self-sustaining and grows exponentially.\n\nIn the realm of business and technology, achieving critical mass is often seen as a pivotal milestone for start-ups and new products, particularly those relying on network effects. Once critical mass is reached, the value of the product or service increases dramatically due to the network effects, leading to accelerated adoption and growth.',
    realexamples = E'Social Networking Sites: For a new social networking site, reaching critical mass means acquiring a sufficient user base that generates enough content and interaction to attract more users. Facebook, for example, initially focused on college campuses to quickly build a dense network of users, which then helped it expand globally.\n\nRide-Sharing Apps: Ride-sharing platforms like Uber and Lyft need a critical mass of drivers and riders in each new city they enter. A sufficient number of drivers ensures short wait times, making the service attractive to riders. Conversely, a large pool of riders ensures drivers can find enough fares to make their participation worthwhile.\n\nCryptocurrencies: The value and stability of a cryptocurrency often depend on achieving a critical mass of users who trade it and merchants who accept it as payment. Bitcoin’s growth, for instance, has been significantly fueled by reaching critical thresholds that have led to wider acceptance and use.
'
WHERE modelid='928cf93b-8c49-4570-aee6-e60cd7609eee';

UPDATE mentalmodels
SET bigdescription = E'The Anchoring Effect is a cognitive bias that influences how people intuitively assess probabilities and make decisions based on the first piece of information they receive, known as the "anchor." This mental model was identified by psychologists Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman, who noted that once an anchor is set, subsequent judgments are made by adjusting away from that anchor, often insufficiently. The anchoring effect shows how initial exposure to a number or value can significantly impact decision-making, negotiations, pricing strategies, and judgments, even when the anchor is arbitrary or unrelated to the decision at hand.\n\nThis bias can affect a wide range of scenarios, from financial decision-making to everyday choices. Understanding and recognizing the anchoring effect can help individuals and businesses make more informed decisions by critically evaluating how initial information might bias their final judgments.',
    realexamples = E'Salary Negotiations: In job negotiations, the first salary number mentioned can significantly influence the negotiation outcome. If an employer first offers a low salary (setting a low anchor), the final agreed salary may be lower than if the employee had set a higher anchor by stating their salary expectation first.\n\nReal Estate Pricing: When selling a house, the initial listing price sets an anchor that can influence potential buyers'' perceptions of value and the final sale price. A home priced too high initially may deter offers, even if the price is later lowered, because the high anchor influences buyers'' perception of the property''s worth.\n\nJudicial Sentencing: Research has shown that even experienced legal professionals can be influenced by anchoring. When provided with a suggested sentence length before making their own judgment, judges'' sentencing decisions can be anchored by the suggestion, impacting the fairness and objectivity of their decision-making process.
'
WHERE modelid='861969aa-d5ea-4025-8b9f-4782eebb8862';

UPDATE mentalmodels
SET bigdescription = E'Social proof is a psychological phenomenon where people assume the actions of others in an attempt to reflect correct behavior for a given situation. This concept, identified by psychologist Robert Cialdini in his 1984 book, "Influence: The Psychology of Persuasion," highlights the human tendency to look to others to determine their own actions, especially in situations where they are uncertain about what to do. Social proof is driven by the belief that surrounding people possess more knowledge about the situation.\n\nThe principle of social proof leverages the power of the collective to influence individual behavior. It''s evident in a wide range of human activities and is a key factor in marketing strategies, online user experiences, and social behavior. Recognizing and understanding social proof can help individuals make better decisions by critically evaluating why they are following the crowd and whether the crowd''s actions align with their best interests.',
    realexamples = E'Consumer Behavior: Product reviews and testimonials serve as social proof that can significantly influence purchasing decisions. When consumers are uncertain about buying a product, they often look at reviews to determine its quality and reliability based on others'' experiences.\n\nSocial Media Trends: The popularity of content on social media, as measured by likes, shares, and comments, acts as social proof, encouraging further engagement from users. Viral trends often gain momentum through social proof, as people join in because they see many others participating.\n\nRestaurant Dynamics: The presence of customers in a restaurant serves as social proof of its quality. A busy restaurant with a waiting line is often perceived as better than an empty one, leading more people to dine there based on the assumption that many customers indicate good food or experience.
'
WHERE modelid='2002e8c7-70d2-4283-9d2c-662a69d9f4c9';

UPDATE mentalmodels
SET bigdescription = E'The Scarcity Principle is a psychological and economic concept suggesting that people value and desire something more when it is rare or difficult to obtain. This principle, widely recognized in the field of behavioral economics, was notably explored by Robert Cialdini in his seminal work on influence and persuasion. Scarcity taps into the human instinct of loss aversion, where the potential of losing access to a resource makes it seem more valuable than it might be if it were abundant. This effect is not only seen in consumer behavior but also influences decision-making, social dynamics, and even personal relationships.\n\nScarcity can create a sense of urgency, prompting individuals to act quickly to acquire something before it runs out. Marketers and businesses often leverage this principle to enhance the appeal of their products or services, employing tactics like limited-time offers, exclusive memberships, or highlighting limited stock to boost sales and engagement.',
    realexamples = E'Limited Edition Products: When companies release a product as a limited edition, stating that only a certain number will be made, it often leads to a rush of customers wanting to purchase the item before it sells out. The scarcity of the product makes it more desirable, driving up demand and, in some cases, allowing the company to command a higher price.\n\nFlash Sales: Online retailers use flash sales, where discounts are offered for a short period, to create a sense of urgency among consumers. The limited time frame leverages the scarcity of time, pushing customers to make purchases more quickly than they might under normal circumstances.\n\nWater Restrictions: In areas experiencing drought, water restrictions may be put in place, limiting the use of water for certain activities to specific days or times. The scarcity of water availability heightens people''s awareness of its value, leading to more conscientious usage and efforts to conserve this scarce resource.'
WHERE modelid='eb81e3cf-8dd6-4179-bf14-fd71eaaaa585';

UPDATE mentalmodels
SET bigdescription = E'Status quo bias is a cognitive bias that favors the current state of affairs, leading individuals to prefer things to remain the same or to choose options that maintain the status quo. This bias stems from a variety of psychological factors, including fear of loss, preference for familiarity, and the desire to avoid the effort or risk associated with change. Highlighted in the work of Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky, status quo bias can significantly impact decision-making processes, often causing people to make choices that are not in their best interest or to resist beneficial innovations and changes.\n\nThe bias is particularly influential in areas requiring active choices, such as personal finance, health care decisions, and political elections. Understanding and recognizing status quo bias is crucial for overcoming inertia and making decisions that align more closely with one’s goals and interests.',
    realexamples = E'Retirement Savings: Many employees stick with default retirement savings plans or contributions rates set by their employers, even when adjusting these could lead to better financial outcomes. The effort and uncertainty involved in changing contributions or investment allocations can make the status quo seem more appealing.\n\nHealthcare Choices: Patients often stick with a long-standing medical provider or treatment plan, even when evidence suggests an alternative might be more effective. The comfort of familiarity and fear of the unknown can make the status quo more attractive than exploring new options.\n\nTechnology Adoption: Individuals and organizations may continue using outdated technology or systems because the perceived cost and effort of upgrading outweigh the potential benefits. This bias can hinder productivity and innovation, as the benefits of new technology are overlooked in favor of the familiar.'
WHERE modelid='75e2065e-8656-4fd0-a8e4-b6642bc8a3f4';

UPDATE mentalmodels
SET bigdescription = E'Reciprocity is a social norm and psychological principle suggesting that when someone does something beneficial for us, we feel compelled to return the favor. This inherent desire to give back when we've received creates a cycle of mutual benefit and fosters cooperation among individuals. Robert Cialdini, in his exploration of influence and persuasion, identifies reciprocity as one of the key principles guiding human behavior in social interactions and exchanges. The concept is deeply rooted in human psychology and cultural practices worldwide, acting as a foundational element in building and maintaining social bonds and community cohesion.\n\nReciprocity operates on both small and large scales, from everyday acts of kindness to complex transactions in business and diplomacy. Understanding and leveraging reciprocity can significantly enhance interpersonal relationships, negotiation outcomes, and social dynamics. It plays a crucial role in marketing strategies, customer relations, and even in the development of trust and loyalty.',
    realexamples = E'Gift-Giving Cultures: Many cultures practice elaborate gift-giving rituals, where the exchange of gifts serves to strengthen bonds and express social ties. The expectation of reciprocity ensures that these gestures lead to a deepening of mutual respect and understanding, reinforcing social networks.\n\nBusiness and Marketing: Companies often use the principle of reciprocity in their marketing efforts, such as offering free samples to potential customers. This act of generosity can create a sense of obligation among recipients, making them more likely to make a purchase or recommend the business to others.\n\nWorkplace Dynamics: Acts of reciprocity in the workplace, such as helping a colleague with a project or offering support during challenging times, can foster a collaborative and supportive work environment. This mutual assistance helps build a culture of trust and cooperation, leading to improved morale and productivity.'
WHERE modelid='0b883251-88db-4077-9d84-d410977b3430';

UPDATE mentalmodels
SET bigdescription = E'Loss aversion is a concept from behavioral economics and psychology that describes people's tendency to prefer avoiding losses to acquiring equivalent gains. It's a principle suggesting that the pain of losing is psychologically about twice as powerful as the pleasure of gaining. This asymmetry in emotional impact influences a wide range of decision-making behaviors, leading individuals to make choices that minimize losses even when those choices might not be in their best interest from a purely rational standpoint. Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky introduced loss aversion in their seminal work on prospect theory, highlighting it as a fundamental driver behind human attitudes towards risk and uncertainty.\n\nLoss aversion can be observed in various aspects of life, from financial investments to everyday choices, affecting how people assess risk, value possessions, and react to change. Understanding loss aversion helps explain behaviors like why individuals stick with the status quo, sell winning investments too early while holding on to losing ones, or why they might overweight small risks when making decisions.',
    realexamples = E'Financial Decision-Making: Investors might exhibit loss aversion by holding onto losing stocks in hopes of breaking even, rather than selling at a loss and investing in other opportunities. This behavior can lead to greater financial losses over time, as individuals are reluctant to accept a sure loss, even if it's the rational choice.\n\nConsumer Behavior: The endowment effect, closely related to loss aversion, describes why people often demand much more to give up an object than they would be willing to pay to acquire it. For example, homeowners might value their property above market rate, making it difficult to sell, because the potential loss from selling at a lower price feels more significant than the gain.\n\nPolicy and Change Resistance: In organizational and policy contexts, loss aversion can lead to resistance against new initiatives or reforms. Individuals or groups might oppose changes due to the fear of losing existing benefits or privileges, even if the overall benefits of the change could outweigh the losses.'
WHERE modelid='0d6c9a53-8367-4878-b7d9-8e350eda8e98';

UPDATE mentalmodels
SET bigdescription = E'Simplicity Theory, closely associated with the concept of Occam's Razor, emphasizes the preference for the simplest explanation that still accounts for all observed phenomena. This theory suggests that among competing hypotheses, the one with the fewest assumptions should be selected. The drive for simplicity underlies much of scientific inquiry, decision-making, and even aesthetic appreciation, reflecting a universal human inclination to favor clarity and efficiency.\n\nSimplicity Theory is not just an abstract principle but a practical guide in various fields, including design, communication, education, and problem-solving. It advocates for minimizing complexity unless it adds significant value, thereby making information, products, and systems more accessible, understandable, and usable. Embracing simplicity can lead to more effective communication, more intuitive designs, and solutions that are easier to implement and maintain.',
    realexamples = E'Scientific Theories: In science, simplicity is a guiding principle for theory development. When faced with multiple explanations for a phenomenon, scientists tend to favor the simplest one that accounts for all the data. This approach has led to the development of elegant theories that explain complex realities in straightforward terms, such as Newton's laws of motion or Einstein's theory of relativity.\n\nProduct Design: The principle of simplicity in product design is epitomized by companies like Apple, which prioritize clean, minimalist designs that enhance user experience. This focus on simplicity has not only set new standards in design aesthetics but has also proven to be highly effective in making technology more approachable and intuitive for users.\n\nLifestyle Choices: The growing popularity of minimalist lifestyles, where individuals seek to reduce clutter and focus on what's truly important, reflects simplicity theory's relevance beyond professional domains. By prioritizing simplicity, people aim to reduce stress, increase focus, and find more satisfaction in fewer, more meaningful possessions and experiences.'
WHERE modelid='c46d29d2-0476-4fbf-81c8-1da0ee9fc8b7';

UPDATE mentalmodels
SET bigdescription = E'Mental accounting is a concept in behavioral economics that describes how people categorize, evaluate, and mentally allocate their money into different ''accounts'' or budgets based on subjective criteria. This mental segmentation can significantly influence spending, saving, and investment decisions, often leading to irrational financial behaviors. The term was coined by economist Richard Thaler, highlighting the cognitive processes that cause individuals to treat money differently depending on its source, intended use, or other psychological labels applied to it.\n\nMental accounting reveals why people might splurge with a windfall while being frugal with their regular income, or why they keep money in a low-interest savings account while carrying high-interest debt. Understanding mental accounting can help individuals make more rational and cohesive financial decisions by recognizing these cognitive biases.
',
    realexamples = E'Windfall Gains: People often treat unexpected money, such as tax refunds, bonuses, or lottery winnings, differently from regular earnings. This ''found money'' might be more readily spent on luxuries or non-essential items due to its categorization as extra or bonus funds, rather than being allocated to savings or debt repayment.\n\nSpending Habits: Mental accounting can explain why someone might drive across town to save $10 on a $20 item but not bother to do the same for a $10 saving on a $500 item. The perceived value of the saving is mentally accounted for differently based on the context or ''account'' it''s placed in, even though the absolute saving is the same.\n\nBudget Segregation: Individuals might mentally allocate specific budgets for dining, entertainment, or groceries and resist using funds from one category for another, even when facing a shortfall. This segregation can lead to inefficient use of resources, such as forgoing necessary purchases or indulging in unnecessary ones based on these arbitrary allocations.
'
WHERE modelid='6c74287d-abbc-4e05-9494-0a38f081d290';

UPDATE mentalmodels
SET bigdescription = E'Prospect Theory, developed by Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky in 1979, is a cornerstone of behavioral economics that describes how people choose between probabilistic alternatives involving risk, where the probabilities of outcomes are known. The theory posits that people value gains and losses differently, leading to decision-making that deviates from expected utility theory. Essentially, losses loom larger than gains, and people are more sensitive to changes in their status quo than to the absolute value of their wealth.\n\nProspect Theory introduces several key concepts, such as loss aversion (the idea that losses are perceived as more significant than equivalent gains), the endowment effect (valuing what one owns more highly than what one does not), and framing effects (the impact of how choices are presented on decision-making). These concepts have profound implications for understanding consumer behavior, financial decision-making, and policy design, illustrating the complexity of human attitudes towards risk and reward.
',
    realexamples = E'Investment Choices: Prospect theory can explain why investors might irrationally hold onto losing stocks to avoid realizing a loss, a behavior known as the disposition effect. The pain associated with locking in a loss outweighs the rational decision to minimize future losses by selling the underperforming asset.\n\nInsurance Purchasing: People often buy insurance to avoid potential losses, even when the cost of the insurance over time exceeds the expected loss. This behavior, driven by loss aversion, shows a preference for paying a known cost to avoid the possibility of a larger, though less probable, loss.\n\nMarketing and Pricing Strategies: Marketers use framing to influence consumer decisions, presenting options in a way that highlights potential losses or gains. For example, framing a discount as avoiding a loss (''Save $10'') can be more effective than framing it as a gain (''Get $10 off''), tapping into the loss aversion described by prospect theory.
'
WHERE modelid='4dfdf8a3-9d23-4444-bbcf-9b4d31f17e04';

UPDATE mentalmodels
SET bigdescription = E'Regression to the mean is a statistical phenomenon that occurs when extreme or unusual outcomes are followed by outcomes that are closer to the average or mean on subsequent attempts or measurements. This concept is critical in understanding patterns within data sets across various domains, including sports performance, business metrics, and medical treatments. It highlights the natural variability and tendency of systems to stabilize over time.\n\nThe principle was first introduced by Sir Francis Galton in the context of hereditary statures, noting that extremely tall parents tended to have shorter children relative to their height, and vice versa, with the children''s heights regressing towards the population mean. Understanding regression to the mean helps in making accurate predictions and interpretations from data, avoiding the misattribution of causes to purely random variations.
',
    realexamples = E'Sports Performance: A player who scores exceptionally high in one game is likely to score closer to their average in subsequent games, not necessarily due to a decrease in skill but as a natural statistical correction. Similarly, a player with a surprisingly low score is likely to improve simply due to chance.\n\nBusiness Sales Fluctuations: A company might experience an unusually high revenue quarter due to factors such as seasonal demand or a successful marketing campaign. Expecting future revenues to continue at this level without recognizing the effect of regression to the mean could lead to overestimation and misallocation of resources.\n\nMedical Treatment Efficacy: In clinical trials, patients with extreme symptoms might show significant improvement after treatment. However, part of this improvement may be attributed to regression to the mean, as those initially experiencing severe symptoms naturally move closer to average outcomes over time, regardless of the treatment.
'
WHERE modelid='c2a13cca-e827-4f63-a2e3-482763d195b2';

UPDATE mentalmodels
SET bigdescription = E'The Availability Heuristic is a mental shortcut identified by psychologists Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman, which relies on immediate examples that come to a person’s mind when evaluating a specific topic, concept, method, or decision. This heuristic operates under the premise that if something can be recalled easily, it must be important or at least more common than alternatives not as readily recalled. While often useful for quick judgments, the availability heuristic can lead to biased thinking and decision-making, particularly when the examples that come to mind are not representative of the actual situation or when they are influenced by recent events, media coverage, or personal experiences.
',
    realexamples = E'Perception of Risk: After hearing news reports about airplane accidents, individuals might overestimate the dangers of flying due to the vividness and emotional impact of such reports, despite statistics showing that air travel is safer than car travel on a per-mile basis.\n\nHealth Concerns: The sudden outbreak of a disease or widespread media coverage of a health scare can lead people to believe that such illnesses are more common than they are, influencing their behavior and perceptions of health risks disproportionately.\n\nInvestment Decisions: Investors might base their decisions on the most recent performance of the stock market or a particular stock, leading to reactive rather than strategic investing. If the market has been doing well recently, they might assume it will continue to do so, ignoring longer-term trends and fundamentals.
'
WHERE modelid='d6cf8982-6ada-4299-93f2-f884f590fd03';

UPDATE mentalmodels
SET bigdescription = E'The Representativeness Heuristic is a mental shortcut that involves judging the probability of an event or the likelihood of an object belonging to a category based on how much it resembles the typical case within that category. Developed by psychologists Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky, this heuristic simplifies complex decision-making processes by relying on an instinctual comparison rather than thorough analysis. While this can be efficient, it often leads to cognitive biases such as base rate neglect and the conjunction fallacy, where individuals ignore statistical information in favor of anecdotal evidence or fail to consider that specific conditions are less probable than a single general one.
',
    realexamples = E'Job Candidate Assessment: Hiring managers might rely on the representativeness heuristic when evaluating candidates, assuming someone from a prestigious university with a certain degree is automatically a better fit for a job, overlooking other candidates with diverse but relevant experiences.\n\nMedical Diagnosis: Doctors might diagnose a common illness based on symptoms that appear representative of that illness, potentially overlooking a rarer but more accurate diagnosis that doesn''t fit the typical presentation as closely.\n\nInvestment Decisions: Investors might see a company in a booming industry and assume it will be successful, mirroring the industry''s average without considering the company''s specific situation, leading to misplaced investments.
'
WHERE modelid='a2ec0019-ae98-4e32-8ed0-3a3214282293';

UPDATE mentalmodels
SET bigdescription = E'The Framing Effect describes how people react differently to a particular choice or judgment depending on how it is presented, or "framed," whether as a loss or a gain. This cognitive bias, extensively studied by Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman, demonstrates that the context in which information is presented can significantly influence decision-making and judgment. The framing effect is pivotal in understanding human behavior in economics, politics, health communication, and any area where choice presentation affects decision outcomes.
',
    realexamples = E'Medical Decision-Making: The way treatment options are presented can significantly affect patient choices. For example, a surgery might be described in terms of a 90% survival rate (gain frame) or a 10% mortality rate (loss frame), leading to different emotional responses and choices, even though the statistical probability is the same.\n\nEnvironmental Policy: Public support for environmental policies can depend on framing. Highlighting the positive impact of conservation efforts on wildlife preservation (gain frame) may elicit more support than emphasizing the consequences of inaction, such as species extinction (loss frame).\n\nFinancial Planning: The framing of financial products, such as highlighting the potential gains from an investment plan versus the risks of loss, can influence individuals'' willingness to invest. Similarly, framing a retirement plan in terms of the income it can provide (gain) rather than the costs associated with it (loss) can affect participation rates.
'
WHERE modelid='80c57775-b170-4b90-92af-e73cbf94c8d7';

UPDATE mentalmodels
SET bigdescription = E'Stereotyping is a cognitive process where individuals assign specific attributes, characteristics, or roles to others based on their membership in a particular social group, often without considering the individual''s unique qualities and behaviors. This mental shortcut allows people to quickly categorize and respond to social information, but it also leads to overgeneralizations and biases. Stereotypes can be based on a range of factors, including race, gender, age, profession, and nationality, and they significantly impact interpersonal interactions, decision-making, and societal dynamics.
',
    realexamples = E'Employment Decisions: In the workplace, stereotyping can influence hiring, promotion, and evaluation processes. For example, assuming that women are less suited for leadership roles than men can lead to gender disparities in executive positions, irrespective of individual abilities and qualifications.\n\nEducational Opportunities: Stereotypes about intellectual capabilities based on race or ethnicity can affect teachers'' expectations and interactions with students, influencing students'' academic performance and self-esteem, and potentially creating self-fulfilling prophecies.\n\nMedia Representation: Media often perpetuates stereotypes by consistently depicting certain groups in limited or biased roles, shaping public perception and reinforcing existing stereotypes. For instance, portraying minority groups primarily in criminal or subservient roles can influence societal attitudes and perpetuate prejudice.
'
WHERE modelid='7a2f5fd6-7f65-4a8e-9a4e-ba0163b95be6';

UPDATE mentalmodels
SET bigdescription = E'Confirmation bias is the tendency to search for, interpret, favor, and remember information in a way that confirms one''s preexisting beliefs or hypotheses, while giving disproportionately less consideration to alternative possibilities. This cognitive bias affects individuals across various domains, including decision-making, reasoning, and emotional reactions. Confirmation bias can lead to overconfidence in personal beliefs and can limit one''s ability to make objective decisions. It plays a significant role in how information is gathered, interpreted, and recalled, often leading to a skewed perception of reality.
',
    realexamples = E'Social Media Echo Chambers: Online platforms can amplify confirmation bias through algorithms that feed users content similar to what they''ve liked or engaged with before, creating an echo chamber where one''s beliefs are constantly reinforced without exposure to contrasting viewpoints.\n\nPolitical Opinions: People tend to select news sources and communities that align with their political beliefs, reinforcing their views without considering opposing evidence. This can deepen ideological divides and hinder constructive dialogue between differing viewpoints.\n\nInvestment Decisions: Investors might focus on positive news regarding a stock they own, ignoring negative indicators, leading to potentially misguided investment choices based on an overly optimistic assessment rather than a balanced analysis.
'
WHERE modelid='d7bc5166-8cea-495a-95f5-216149dece24';

UPDATE mentalmodels
SET bigdescription = E'The Gambler’s Fallacy, also known as the Monte Carlo Fallacy, is a misconception of probability, where individuals mistakenly believe that past events can influence the likelihood of future events that are truly random. This fallacy often arises in situations of chance, like gambling or lottery, where a streak of one outcome (e.g., flipping a coin and getting heads multiple times in a row) leads to the belief that the opposite outcome (tails, in this case) is due to happen soon, despite each event being independent with a fixed probability.\n\nThis bias illustrates a fundamental misunderstanding of the law of large numbers and independence in statistics. The Gambler’s Fallacy can lead to poor decision-making, as it biases individuals to expect reversals following streaks, potentially influencing financial, legal, and personal choices based on erroneous assumptions about how random events operate.
',
    realexamples = E'Casino Gambling: A classic example occurs in roulette, where if the ball has landed on black several times consecutively, players might erroneously bet large sums on red, believing it is more likely to occur next. Each spin is independent, and the odds remain the same, regardless of previous outcomes.\n\nSports: Fans and players might believe a baseball player on a hitting streak is “due” for a hit or, conversely, a hitless streak means a hit is coming soon. This belief can affect betting and strategic decisions, ignoring the statistical reality that each at-bat is an independent event with its own probability of success.\n\nFinancial Markets: Investors might perceive that a stock or market that has been falling for consecutive days is due to rebound (or vice versa), leading to investment decisions based on pattern recognition rather than analysis of underlying fundamentals.
'
WHERE modelid='8827cf18-e1c0-4ff6-877b-ec5443e5eaec';

UPDATE mentalmodels
SET bigdescription = E'Hindsight bias, often referred to as the "knew-it-all-along" effect, is a cognitive bias that involves the tendency of people to perceive events that have already occurred as having been more predictable than they actually were before the events took place. This bias can lead to oversimplification in understanding cause and effect, distortion of memories of what was known or believed before an event, and an overconfidence in one''s ability to predict future events based on past outcomes.\n\nThe phenomenon was extensively studied by psychologists Baruch Fischhoff and Ruth Beyth, who demonstrated how knowledge of an outcome influences our perception of its inevitability. This bias affects various domains, including legal judgments, financial investing, and personal decision-making, by making events seem inevitable in retrospect, thereby skewing learning processes and accountability assessments.
',
    realexamples = E'Financial Market Analysis: After a significant market downturn or crash, analysts and investors might claim the signs were obvious and predictable, despite the wide range of opinions and uncertainty preceding the event. This hindsight bias can lead to misplaced confidence in predicting future market movements.\n\nMedical Diagnoses: Once a diagnosis is confirmed, doctors might believe the diagnosis was more apparent from the start than it truly was, potentially overlooking the diagnostic process''s uncertainties and complexities.\n\nHistorical Events: People often interpret historical events as being more inevitable than they were, failing to appreciate the contingency of past decisions and the unpredictability faced by decision-makers at the time. For example, the outcome of a political election or a military conflict might seem obvious in hindsight, ignoring the influence of unforeseen factors and decisions.
'
WHERE modelid='d0f88fd4-5060-4aa1-a3a8-dec682590024';

UPDATE mentalmodels
SET bigdescription = E'Hyperbolic discounting is a behavioral economics concept that describes how people disproportionately value immediate rewards over future rewards, even when the future rewards are significantly larger. This tendency leads to choices that favor short-term gratification at the expense of long-term benefit, reflecting a nonlinear perception of time in decision-making processes. The term ''hyperbolic'' refers to the mathematical model that best fits this time-inconsistent behavior, as opposed to the exponential discounting assumed by traditional economic models which suggest a consistent valuation of future benefits.\n\nThis concept explains a wide range of everyday behaviors and challenges, including procrastination, the difficulty in saving for retirement, and the tendency to engage in unhealthy habits. Hyperbolic discounting underscores the conflict between our ''present self'' and ''future self,'' highlighting the psychological struggle in prioritizing long-term goals over immediate desires.
',
    realexamples = E'Savings and Financial Planning: Many individuals find it challenging to save money for the future, such as for retirement, preferring instead to spend money on immediate pleasures or needs. This behavior can lead to inadequate savings and financial insecurity in later years, despite the known benefits of early and consistent saving.\n\nHealth and Fitness: People often choose immediate pleasures, such as eating unhealthy food or skipping exercise, over the long-term health benefits of a healthier lifestyle. Even when aware of the long-term consequences, the immediate satisfaction outweighs future health improvements in the decision-making process.\n\nProcrastination: Hyperbolic discounting plays a significant role in procrastination, where individuals delay tasks with future benefits in favor of more immediately rewarding activities, even when this delay may lead to negative consequences.
'
WHERE modelid='0a72f904-7738-440a-9412-bb579ede4006';

UPDATE mentalmodels
SET bigdescription = E'Negativity bias is a psychological phenomenon where negative events, emotions, or information have a greater effect on one''s psychological state and processes than neutral or positive things. This bias suggests that things of a more negative nature (such as unpleasant thoughts, emotions, or social interactions) will have a bigger impact on a person''s psychological state and processes than neutral or positive things, even if they are of equal intensity. The concept, extensively explored by researchers including Roy Baumeister, highlights the evolutionary aspect of human cognition, where paying more attention to negative threats was crucial for survival.\n\nNegativity bias influences a wide range of behaviors and perceptions, from individual decision-making and relationship dynamics to media consumption patterns. It can lead to a skewed perception of the world, contribute to stress and anxiety, and affect decision-making processes, often leading to risk-averse or pessimistic outcomes.
',
    realexamples = E'News Consumption: People are drawn to and remember negative news more vividly than positive news. Media outlets, knowing this, often focus more on negative stories, which can skew public perception of the world towards the negative, affecting mood and outlook on life.\n\nSocial Interactions: Negative comments or experiences in social settings tend to be remembered more clearly and have a more lasting impact than positive ones. This can affect relationships and social dynamics, where a single negative experience might outweigh numerous positive interactions.\n\nRisk Assessment: In decision-making, the potential losses tend to weigh more heavily on people''s minds than equivalent gains. This can lead to overly cautious behavior or aversion to risk, even when the potential benefits outweigh the risks.
'
WHERE modelid='9deb45bb-8e5e-4626-aed5-bf8a0b866832';

UPDATE mentalmodels
SET bigdescription = E'Optimism bias is a cognitive bias that causes individuals to believe they are less likely to experience negative events and more likely to experience positive events in the future compared to others. This bias reflects an error in subjective probability estimation, where people underestimate the chances of encountering adverse situations such as illness, accidents, or financial problems, while overestimating their prospects for success in areas like career, relationships, and life achievements.\n\nThe optimism bias plays a crucial role in motivating individuals by fostering a positive outlook on life, but it can also lead to inadequate preparation for potential risks and challenges. Recognizing and understanding this bias is essential for balancing hopeful expectations with realistic planning and risk assessment.
',
    realexamples = E'Health Risks: Many people underestimate their likelihood of developing health issues, such as heart disease or cancer, believing these problems are more prevalent among others. This optimism can lead to neglecting preventive health measures, screenings, and lifestyle changes that could mitigate these risks.\n\nFinancial Planning: Individuals often overestimate their future financial prosperity, assuming they''ll earn more and face fewer financial setbacks than statistically likely. This can result in insufficient savings for retirement, lack of emergency funds, and overly optimistic investment decisions.\n\nProject Planning: In both personal and professional settings, people tend to assume projects will take less time and resources than they actually do, a phenomenon known as the planning fallacy, which is closely related to optimism bias. This leads to unrealistic timelines, budget overruns, and stress.
'
WHERE modelid='69f03920-5682-45f2-a6e4-92ceca5099fa';

UPDATE mentalmodels
SET bigdescription = E'The Planning Fallacy is a cognitive bias that causes people to underestimate the time, costs, and risks of future actions while overestimating the benefits. Coined by psychologists Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky, it is a phenomenon observed in various planning and forecasting activities, where individuals and organizations are overly optimistic about their capacity to complete tasks within a set timeframe. This bias affects a wide range of projects, from everyday tasks to large-scale infrastructure projects, leading to delays, cost overruns, and unmet objectives.\n\nDespite ample evidence of past overruns and missed deadlines, both individuals and planners tend to fall prey to this optimism, often attributing setbacks to external or one-off factors rather than systematic underestimation. The Planning Fallacy underscores the human tendency to focus on the best-case scenarios, ignoring the statistical probabilities and historical performance data that suggest otherwise.
',
    realexamples = E'Personal Projects: Whether it''s home renovation, learning a new skill, or completing a work assignment, people frequently set unrealistic timelines for themselves, underestimating the complexities and potential obstacles, leading to stress and frustration when goals are not met as anticipated.\n\nSoftware Development: In the tech industry, projects often run over schedule and budget due to the planning fallacy. Developers might underestimate the time required to write, test, and debug code, leading to delayed product launches and dissatisfied stakeholders.\n\nPublic Infrastructure Projects: Large-scale projects, like building bridges, highways, or stadiums, frequently experience significant delays and budget increases. Planners often ignore potential challenges and setbacks, resulting in costs that far exceed initial estimates.
'
WHERE modelid='3c1b112a-dc8c-49da-b1c6-124f740d52c6';

UPDATE mentalmodels
SET bigdescription = E'Risk compensation is a theory which suggests that people typically adjust their behavior in response to the perceived level of risk, becoming more cautious when they sense greater risk and less cautious when they feel more protected. This behavior is observed across various contexts, including driving, sports, and public health. For example, drivers might drive faster and pay less attention when wearing seatbelts, or individuals might engage in riskier health behaviors when they believe they are protected by vaccines or medications. Understanding risk compensation is crucial for designing safety and public health measures that do not inadvertently lead to riskier behaviors.
',
    realexamples = E'Helmet Use in Sports: The introduction of helmets in sports like American football or cycling might lead to more aggressive tactics or less caution, as the perceived risk of head injury is reduced, potentially offsetting some of the safety benefits.\n\nPublic Health Measures: In the context of infectious diseases, individuals who receive vaccinations or negative test results might perceive themselves as at low risk and engage in behaviors that could increase their chances of infection or spreading the disease to others.\n\nAutomobile Safety Features: Advances in car safety technology, such as anti-lock braking systems (ABS) and electronic stability control (ESC), can lead to drivers feeling more secure and thus driving more aggressively, which might reduce the net safety benefits of these technologies.

n'
WHERE modelid='464f38da-4ef0-498d-b71c-77f697a252ca';

UPDATE mentalmodels
SET bigdescription = E'Survivorship bias is a logical error of concentrating on the people or things that made it past some selection process and overlooking those that did not, often because of their lack of visibility. This bias can lead to overly optimistic beliefs because failures are ignored, as only successes are seen. The term is used in various contexts, including finance, business, history, and psychology, to explain how focusing solely on survivors skews our understanding of reality. Survivorship bias can cause us to misjudge the chances of success, as the failures that would provide a more balanced view are obscured or forgotten.\n\nThe concept was popularized in part by statistician Abraham Wald, who during World War II suggested that military aircraft should be reinforced in areas that showed no damage on returning planes. His rationale was that planes hit in those undamaged areas were not surviving to return home, highlighting an instance of survivorship bias in military strategy.
',
    realexamples = E'Investment Funds: Financial analysts might assess the performance of mutual funds over a period, but if they only consider funds that exist at the end of the period, they ignore those that performed poorly and were closed or merged. This can lead to inflated average returns for the sector.\n\nEntrepreneurial Success: The media often highlights successful entrepreneurs, creating a perception that success is more common than it actually is. Failures, being less visible, are underreported, which can skew aspiring entrepreneurs'' understanding of the risks involved in startups.\n\nMedical Treatments: Survivorship bias can occur in non-randomized studies of treatment outcomes, where only the subjects who survived or remained in the study are analyzed. This may lead to overly positive interpretations of a treatment''s effectiveness.
'
WHERE modelid='b81d7fe2-4f46-43c8-92a1-d87c3b45efd3';

UPDATE mentalmodels
SET bigdescription = E'The Tragedy of the Commons describes a situation in a shared-resource system where individual users, acting independently according to their own self-interest, deplete or spoil shared resources, even though it is contrary to the common good of all users by depleting or spoiling that resource through their collective action. The concept is often used in environmental science to explain how public resources like air, oceans, and fisheries can be overused and damaged by individual actions.
',
    realexamples = E'Overfishing: In international waters, where no single country has jurisdiction, the lack of effective management leads to overfishing. Fishermen, motivated by immediate profits, catch fish at a rate that exceeds the fish population''s ability to reproduce, leading to fish stock depletion.\n\nAir Pollution: The atmosphere is a common resource that can suffer from the tragedy of the commons. Individual companies may find it economically beneficial to emit pollutants into the air, but if all companies do this, air quality worsens, affecting health and the environment for the entire community.\n\nPublic Land Overuse: Public lands open for grazing and recreation can become degraded when too many users, such as ranchers or tourists, use the resource beyond its capacity to naturally regenerate, leading to soil erosion, loss of vegetation, and decreased biodiversity.
'
WHERE modelid='22902e99-9037-45b9-ac16-903ea0f809f5';

UPDATE mentalmodels
SET bigdescription = E'A zero-sum game is a situation in economics and game theory where each participant''s gain or loss of utility is exactly balanced by the losses or gains of the utility of the other participants. If one participant gains, another loses an equivalent amount, such that the net change in wealth or benefit is zero. This concept is often applied to competitive situations where one person''s gain is precisely another''s loss.
',
    realexamples = E'Trading and Markets: Financial markets are often considered zero-sum games, especially in derivatives markets where for every option or future contract gain, there is an equal loss on another side of the transaction.\n\nSports and Competitions: Competitive sports are clear examples of zero-sum games, where one team''s victory is necessarily another team''s loss. The same applies to political elections, where one candidate''s win results in another''s loss.\n\nNegotiations: In negotiation scenarios, particularly those involving fixed resources like land, money, or time, the negotiations can become zero-sum, with parties aiming to maximize their share at the expense of the other''s.
'
WHERE modelid='42d9e3c1-f547-4272-ad99-7b0005bb533a';

UPDATE mentalmodels
SET bigdescription = E'The Byzantine Generals Problem is a situation in computer science used to illustrate the difficulties and complexities of achieving consensus in a distributed computing system with potentially unreliable components. The problem describes a scenario where generals of the Byzantine army camped around an enemy city must agree on a common battle plan, but some generals may attempt to betray the others. The challenge is to ensure that the loyal generals reach agreement on their strategy without being misled by the traitors among them. This problem is fundamental in the field of distributed computing and has implications for systems where security and reliability are paramount, such as in blockchain technology and digital payment systems.
',
    realexamples = E'Blockchain Technology: In blockchain systems, the Byzantine Generals Problem illustrates the challenge of reaching consensus within a network where some participants may act maliciously. Solutions like the Proof of Work and Proof of Stake are designed to mitigate these issues, ensuring that transactions are verified and recorded reliably despite potential bad actors.\n\nDigital Payment Systems: Ensuring the integrity and reliability of digital payments requires overcoming the Byzantine Generals Problem. Systems must ensure that transactions are not fraudulent and that consensus can be reached even in the presence of unreliable or malicious entities within the network.
'
WHERE modelid='a086ebd6-3bb8-4dbe-bc3f-f453e0b637f5';

UPDATE mentalmodels
SET bigdescription = E'The Prisoner''s Dilemma is a standard example of a game analyzed in game theory that shows why two completely rational individuals might not cooperate, even if it appears that it is in their best interest to do so. It illustrates the conflict between individual rationality and collective rationality, where individual decision-making leads to a worse outcome for all participants. The dilemma is framed as two prisoners being interrogated in separate rooms, with the outcome of their cases depending on their ability to cooperate with each other by remaining silent or betraying the other.
',
    realexamples = E'Business Competition: Companies may engage in mutually destructive price wars, where lowering prices to undercut competition reduces profits for both firms. Cooperation by maintaining higher prices would be mutually beneficial, but the incentive to cheat for individual gain leads to a worse outcome for both.\n\nEnvironmental Policy: Countries may fail to cooperate on climate change mitigation, with each nation preferring to benefit from the efforts of others without making significant changes themselves. This lack of cooperation, despite mutual benefits, leads to inadequate action against global environmental challenges.\n\nNuclear Arms Race: The Cold War era nuclear arms race between the United States and the Soviet Union exemplifies the Prisoner''s Dilemma, where both nations would have been better off cooperating to reduce nuclear arsenals, but mutual distrust led to an escalation in nuclear armament.

'
WHERE modelid='9a13fde4-b1e0-491b-adef-4d93401b291c';

UPDATE mentalmodels
SET bigdescription = E'The Peter Principle is a concept in management theory formulated by Dr. Laurence J. Peter, which posits that people in a hierarchical organization tend to rise to their ''level of incompetence'': individuals are promoted based on their success in previous jobs until they reach a level at which they are no longer competent. As a result, many positions are filled by employees who are not fully capable of carrying out their duties, leading to widespread inefficiency within the organization.
',
    realexamples = E'Corporate Ladder: In many organizations, employees are promoted for excelling in their current roles rather than being assessed for their abilities relevant to the intended role. This can result in a mismatch where managers are not suited to their new responsibilities, impacting team and organizational performance.\n\nEducational Institutions: School principals or university deans may be appointed based on their excellent performance as teachers or professors, without considering their administrative skills or leadership capabilities, potentially leading to less effective governance and decision-making.
'
WHERE modelid='9f463fca-ace5-4452-b278-b95adff53ad7';

UPDATE mentalmodels
SET bigdescription = E'Parkinson''s Law states that "work expands so as to fill the time available for its completion." This adage explains why tasks tend to take as much time as is allotted to them. Originally formulated by Cyril Northcote Parkinson in reference to bureaucratic inefficiency, the principle has broader applications in time management, project management, and productivity. It suggests that imposing tighter deadlines can lead to more efficient work, as it forces prioritization and reduces the time available for procrastination or unnecessary perfectionism.
',
    realexamples = E'Corporate Projects: In many organizations, projects are given extensive deadlines, resulting in tasks being stretched to fill the allotted time through the introduction of unnecessary complexity or perfectionism, even if they could be completed much sooner.\n\nPersonal Productivity: Individuals often experience Parkinson’s Law in their personal lives, whether it’s a household chore or personal project, noticing that the task expands to fill the time they’ve set aside for it, regardless of its complexity.
'
WHERE modelid='c74968da-37d0-4617-82f4-da4682ec4aea';

UPDATE mentalmodels
SET bigdescription = E'Moore''s Law is the observation made by Gordon Moore, co-founder of Intel, that the number of transistors on a microchip doubles approximately every two years, though the cost of computers is halved. This observation, made in 1965, has predicted the exponential increase in computing power over the decades, driving advances in technology and digital electronics at a remarkable rate. While not a law in the scientific sense, Moore''s Law has been a guiding principle for the semiconductor industry, setting expectations for innovation, performance improvement, and cost reduction.
',
    realexamples = E'Technological Advancement: The exponential growth in computing power predicted by Moore''s Law has enabled the development of high-performance computers, smartphones, and the internet, transforming society and the global economy.\n\nConsumer Electronics: The regular improvement in processing power, along with cost reductions for semiconductor components, has made advanced technology increasingly accessible to consumers, leading to the widespread availability of powerful personal devices.
'
WHERE modelid='fd7f5d35-706f-43f5-818c-1423e7b6f58d';

UPDATE mentalmodels
SET bigdescription = E'The Lindy Effect is a theory that the future life expectancy of some non-perishable things, like a technology or an idea, is proportional to their current age. In other words, the longer something has been around, the longer it is likely to continue to exist. This concept is often applied to cultural items, technologies, and businesses, suggesting that durability and longevity are indicative of continued existence. The Lindy Effect provides an insight into how the past can inform the future, particularly in the realms of technology, culture, and ideas.
',
    realexamples = E'Cultural Works: Classic books, music, and films that have been popular for decades are likely to remain in the public consciousness far longer than more recent works. Their longevity serves as a testament to their enduring appeal.\n\nTechnologies: Older technologies that have stood the test of time, like the QWERTY keyboard layout, are likely to continue being used, despite the availability of newer alternatives, due to their widespread adoption and users'' familiarity.
'
WHERE modelid='b7eb964f-887e-47d9-bbb5-738fdf40e071';

UPDATE mentalmodels
SET bigdescription = E'The Black Swan Theory, developed by Nassim Nicholas Taleb, describes the profound impact of highly improbable and unpredictable events that have massive consequences. In his 2007 book "The Black Swan," Taleb argues that these rare and unpredictable events underpin almost everything about our world, yet we often ignore them until after they occur, rationalizing them as more predictable than they truly are. The term "black swan" comes from the ancient Western conception that all swans were white because all historical records of swans reported them as white; the discovery of black swans in Australia disrupted this belief, symbolizing the idea that a single observation can invalidate a general statement derived from centuries of confirmatory sightings.
',
    realexamples = E'Financial Crashes: The 2008 financial crisis is often cited as a Black Swan event. Despite the global financial system''s complexity and interconnectivity, the severity of the crisis and its widespread impact were largely unforeseen by economists and analysts, demonstrating the devastating effect of highly improbable events.\n\nTechnological Breakthroughs: The advent of the internet and its revolutionary impact on communication, business, and society was a Black Swan. Its emergence and rapid adoption around the world were not predicted, and it has reshaped every aspect of modern life.\n\nPandemics: The COVID-19 pandemic can be considered a Black Swan event, given its sudden emergence, global spread, and profound impact on health, economies, and daily life worldwide. Despite the history of pandemics, the scale and speed of COVID-19''s disruption were largely unexpected.
'
WHERE modelid='e56c10dd-717e-4cbc-8efa-995611d9857d';

UPDATE mentalmodels
SET bigdescription = E'The Base Rate Fallacy is a cognitive bias where people tend to ignore or underweight the base (or prior) rate of possibility in favor of new or specific information, even when this new information is irrelevant or less informative. This fallacy often occurs in probabilistic reasoning where individuals fail to take into account the overall frequency or likelihood of events. Instead, they focus on specific details or recent examples, leading to skewed or inaccurate judgments.\n\nThe concept highlights a common mistake in our decision-making processes, showing how easily we can overlook broad, general information (the base rate) in favor of specifics. This oversight can drastically affect the accuracy of our conclusions and decisions. The Base Rate Fallacy is particularly prevalent in contexts involving probability, statistics, and risk assessment, where a proper understanding of underlying frequencies is crucial.\n\nIn essence, the Base Rate Fallacy demonstrates our tendency to focus on new and specific information at the expense of established data, leading to potentially flawed decisions. It underscores the importance of integrating all relevant information, both general and specific, to form more accurate judgments.
',
SET realexamples = E'Medical Diagnosis:A doctor receives a report that a patient tested positive for a rare disease, which only affects 1 in 10,000 people. Despite the test''s high accuracy, the doctor overlooks the disease''s low base rate and overestimates the patient''s likelihood of having the disease. A more thorough analysis considering the base rate would show that the patient is still unlikely to have the disease because of its rarity.\n\nJob Candidate Evaluation:An employer is impressed by a job candidate who graduated from a prestigious university and overlooks the base rate of success among all graduates from various universities. This leads the employer to overestimate the candidate''s potential success at the company, neglecting the fact that success depends on many factors beyond alma mater.\n\nInvestment Decisions:An investor hears about a startup''s innovative product and decides to invest, ignoring the base rate of failure for startups, which is quite high. Focused on the specific details of the product and the startup''s pitch, the investor underestimates the overall risk, disregarding the fact that the majority of startups fail within the first few years.
',
WHERE modelid='788c91a7-d6bd-4b39-8ce1-27258b2cbf6c';

